The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain.
To my wife, this book is affectionately dedicated.
Preface.
Most of the adventures recorded in this book really occurred. One or two
were experiences of my own, the rest those of boys who were schoolmates
of mine. Huck Finn is drawn from life, Tom Sawyer also, but not from an
individual. He is a combination of the characteristics of three boys
whom I knew, and therefore belongs to the composite order of architecture.
The odds superstitions touched upon were all prevalent among children
and slaves in the West at the period of this story, that is to say thirty
or forty years ago. Although my book is intended mainly for the
entertainment of boys and girls, I hope it will not be shunned by men
and women on that account, for part of my plan has been to try to
pleasantly remind adults of what they once were themselves, and of how
they felt and thought and talked, and what queer enterprises they
sometimes engaged in.
The Author. Hartford. 1876.
No answer.
Tom?
What's gone with that boy, I wonder? You, Tom?
No answer. The old lady pulled her spectacles down and looked over them
about the room, then she put them up and looked out under them. She
They were her state-pair, the pride of her heart, and were built for
style, not service. She could have seen through a pair of stove-lids
just as well. She looked perplexed for a moment, and then said, not
fiercely, but still loud enough for the furniture to hear,
"'Well, I lay, if I get hold of you, I'll--" She did not finish, for by
this time she was bending down and punching under the bed with a broom,
and so she needed breath to punctuate the punches with. She resurrected
nothing but the cat. I never see the beat of that boy! She went to the
open door and stood in it, and looked out among the tomato-vines and
jimson-weeds that constituted the garden. No, Tom. So she lifted up her
voice at an angle calculated for distance, and shouted,
"'You, Tom!' There was a slight noise behind her, and she turned just
in time to seize a small boy by the slack of his roundabout, and arrest
his flight. There! I might a thought of that closet. What you been
doing in there? Nothing? Nothing? Look at your hands, and look at your
mouth. What is that truck? I don't know, Aunt. Well, I know. It's jam,
that's what it is. Forty times I've said, if you didn't let that jam
alone, I'll skin you. Hand me that switch."
The switch hovered in the air. The peril was desperate.
"'My! Look behind you, Aunt!'
The old lady whirled round and snatched her skirts out of danger. The
lad fled on the instant, scrambled up the high board-fence and
disappeared over it. His Aunt Polly stood surprised a moment, and then
broke into a gentle laugh.
"'Hang that boy! Can't I never learn anything? Ain't he played me tricks
enough like that for me to be looking out for him by this time? But old
fools is the biggest fools there is. Can't learn an old dog new tricks,
as the saying is. But, my goodness, he never plays them alike two days,
and how is a body to know what's coming? He peers to know just how long
he can torment me before I get my dander up, and he knows if he can
make out to put me off for a minute or make me laugh, it's all down
again and I can't hit him a lick. I ain't doing my duty by that, boy,
and that's the Lord's truth, goodness knows. Spare the rod and smile
at the child, as the Good Book says. I'm a-laying up sin and sufferin'
for us both, I know. He's full of the old scratch but laws of me. He's
my own dead sister's boy, poor thing, and I ain't got the heart to lash
him somehow. Every time I let him off my conscience does hurt me so,
and every time I hit him my old heart most breaks. Well, well, a man
that is born of a woman is a few days and full of trouble, as the
evening. That's south-western for afternoon. And I'll just be
obliged to make him work tomorrow to punish him. It's mighty hard to
make him work Saturdays when all the boys is having holiday, but he
hates work more than he hates anything else, and I've got to do some of
my duty by him, or I'll be the ruination of the child.
Tom did play hooky, and he had a very good time. He got back, home
barely in season to help Jim, the small-colored boy, saw next day's
wood, and split the kindling before supper. At least he was there in
time to tell his adventures to Jim, while Jim did three-fourths of the
work. Tom's younger brother, or rather half-brother, Sid, was already
through with his part of the work, picking up chips, for he was a
quiet boy and had no adventurous, troublesome ways. While Tom was
eating his supper and stealing sugar as opportunity offered, Aunt
Polly asked him questions that were full of guile and very deep, for
she wanted to trap him into damaging revealments. Like many other
simple-hearted souls, it was her pet vanity to believe she was endowed
with a talent for dark and mysterious diplomacy, and she loved to
contemplate her most transparent devices as marvels of low cunning.
Said she,
Tom, it was middling warm in school, wasn't it? Yesen. Powerful warm,
wasn't it? Yesen. Didn't you want to go in a swimmin', Tom? A bit of a
scare shot through Tom, a touch of uncomfortable suspicion. He searched
Aunt Polly's face, but it told him nothing, so he said,
No, well, not very much.
The old lady reached out her hand and felt Tom's shirt, and said,
But you ain't too warm now, though! And it flattered her to reflect that
she had discovered that the shirt was dry without anybody knowing that
that was what she had in her mind. But in spite of her, Tom knew where
the wind lay now, so he forestalled what might be the next move.
Some of us pumped on our heads, minds damp yet, see?
Aunt Polly was vexed to think she had overlooked that bit of
circumstantial evidence and missed a trick. Then she had a new
Tom, you didn't have to undo your shirt collar where I sewed it, to
pump on your head, did you? Unbutton your jacket.
The trouble vanished out of Tom's face. He opened his jacket. His
shirt collar was securely sewed.
Bother! Well, go along with you. I'd made sure you'd played hooky and
been a swimmin', but I forgive you, Tom. I reckon you're a kind of
singed cat, as the saying is. Better in your look. This time.
She was half sorry her sagacity had miscarried, and half glad that Tom
had stumbled into obedient conduct for once. But Sidney said,
Well, now if I didn't think you sewed his collar with white thread,
but it's black.
Why, I did sew it with white. Tom!
But Tom did not wait for the rest. As he went out the door, he said,
City, I'll lick you for that.
In a safe place, Tom examined two large needles, which were thrust
into the lapels of his jacket, and had thread bound about them. One
needle carried white thread, and the other black. He said,
She'd never noticed if it hadn't been for Sid. Con found it. Sometimes
she sews it with white, and sometimes she sews it with black. I wish to
Jiminy she'd stick to one or t'other. I can't keep the run of them. But
I bet I'll learn Sid for that. I'll learn him.
He was not the model boy of the village. He knew the model boy very
well, though, and loathed him.
Within two minutes, or even less, he had forgotten all his troubles.
Not because his troubles were one whit less heavy and bitter to him
than a man's are to a man, but because a new and powerful interest
bore them down, and drove them out of his mind for the time. Just as
men's misfortunes are forgotten in the excitement of new enterprises.
This new interest was a valued novelty in whistling, which he had just
acquired from a negro, and he was suffering to practice it undisturbed.
It consisted in a peculiar bird-like turn, a sort of liquid warble,
produced by touching the tongue to the roof of the mouth at short
intervals in the midst of the music. The reader probably remembers how
to do it, if he has ever been a boy.
Diligence and attention soon gave him the knack of it, and he strode
down the street with his mouth full of harmony and his soul full of
gratitude. He felt much as an astronomer feels who has discovered a
new planet. No doubt, as far as strong, deep, unalloyed pleasure is
concerned, the advantage was with a boy, not the astronomer.
The summer evenings were long. It was not dark yet. Presently Tom
checked his whistle. A stranger was before him, a boy a shade larger
than himself. A newcomer of any age or either sex was an impressive
curiosity in the poor little shabby village of St. Petersburg. This
was simply astounding. His cap was a dainty thing, his close-buttoned
blue cloth round about was new and natty, and so were his pantaloons.
He had shoes on, and it was only Friday. He even wore a necktie, a
bright bit of ribbon. He had acidified air about him that ate into Tom's
vitals. The more Tom stared at the splendid marvel, the higher he
turned up his nose at his finery, and the shabbier and shabbier his own
outfit seemed to him to grow. Neither boy spoke. If one moved, the
other moved, but only sidewise, in a circle. They kept face to face and
eye to eye all the time. Finally Tom said,
I can lick you.
I'd like to see you try it.
Well, I can do it.
No, you can't either.
Yes, I can.
No, you can't.
I can.
You can't.
Can't.
An uncomfortable pause. Then Tom said,
What's your name?
It isn't any of your business, maybe.
Well, I'll make it my business.
Well, why don't you?
If you say much, I will.
Much, much, much. There, now.
Oh, you think you're mighty smart, don't you? I could lick you with one
hand tied behind me if I wanted to.
Well, why don't you do it? You say you can do it.
Well, I will, if you fool with me.
Oh, yes, I've seen whole families in the same fix.
Smarty, you think you're some, now, don't you? Oh, what a hat!
You can lump that hat if you don't like it. I dare you to knock it
off. And anybody that'll take a dare will suck eggs.
You're a liar.
You're another.
You're a fighting liar and doesn't take it up.
Ah, take a walk.
Say, if you give me much more of your sass, I'll take and bounce a
rock off in your head.
Oh, of course you will.
Well, I will.
Well, why don't you do it, then?
Why do you keep saying you will for? Why don't you do it? It's
because you're afraid.
I ain't afraid.
You are.
I ain't.
Another pause, and more eyeing and sidling around each other.
Presently they were shoulder to shoulder, Tom said.
Get away from me. Go away yourself. I won't.
Well, I won't, either.
So they stood, each with a foot placed at an angle as a brace, and
both shoving with might and mane and glowering at each other with
hate. But neither could get an advantage. After struggling till both
were hot and flushed, each relaxed his strain with watchful caution,
and Tom said,
You're a coward and a pup. I'll tell my big brother on you, and he can
thrash you with his little finger, and I'll make him do it, too.
Who do I care for your big brother? I've got a brother that's bigger
than he is, and what's more, he can throw him over that fence, too.
Both brothers were imaginary.
That's a lie! Your saying so doesn't make it so.
Tom drew a line in the dust with his big toe, and said,
I dare you to step over that, and I'll lick you till you can't stand
up. Anybody that'll take a dare will steal sheep.
The new boy stepped over promptly, and said,
Now you said you'd do it. Now let's see you do it. Don't you crowd me
now. You'd better look out.
Well, you said you'd do it. Why don't you do it? Buy jingo for two
pence, I will do it.
The new boy took two broad coppers out of his pocket, and held them out
with derision. Tom struck them to the ground. In an instant both boys
were rolling and tumbling in the dirt, gripped together like cats, and
for the space of a minute they tugged and tore at each other's hair
and clothes, punched and scratched each other's noses, and covered
themselves with dust and glory. Presently the confusion took form,
and through the fog of battle Tom appeared seated astride the new boy,
and pounding him with his fists.
Holler nuff! said he. The boy only struggled to free himself. He was
crying, mainly from rage.
Holler nuff! and the pounding went on. At last the stranger got out of
smothered. Nuff! and Tom let him up, and said, Now that'll learn you.
Better look out who you're fooling with next time.
The new boy went off brushing the dust from his clothes, sobbing,
snuffling, and occasionally looking back and shaking his head and
threatening what he would do to Tom the next time he caught him out,
to which Tom responded with jeers and started off in a high feather,
and as soon as his back was turned the new boy snatched up a stone,
threw it, and hit him between the shoulders, and then turned tail and
ran like an antelope. Tom chased the traitor home, and thus found out
where he lived. He then held a position at the gate for some time,
daring the enemy to come outside, but the enemy only made faces at him
through the window and declined. At last the enemy's mother appeared,
called Tom a bad, vicious, vulgar child, and ordered him away. So he
went away, but he said he allowed to lay for that boy. He got home
pretty late that night, and when he climbed cautiously in at the
window he uncovered an ambuscade in the person of his aunt, and when
she saw the state his clothes were in, her resolution to turn his
Saturday holiday into captivity at hard labor became adamantine in its
firmness.
Saturday morning was come, and all the summer world was bright and
fresh and brimming with life. There was a song in every heart, and if
the heart was young the music issued at the lips. There was cheer in
every face, and a spring in every step. The locust trees were in bloom,
and the fragrance of the blossoms filled the air. Cardiff Hill,
beyond the village and above it, was green with vegetation, and it
lay just far enough away to seem a delectable land, dreamy, reposeful
and inviting. Tom appeared on the sidewalk with a bucket of whitewash
and a long-handled brush. He surveyed the fence, and all gladness left
him, and a deep melancholy settled down upon his spirit. Thirty yards
of bored fence nine feet high, life to him seemed hollow, an existence
but a burden. Sighing, he dipped his brush and passed it along the
topmost plank, repeated the operation, did it again, compared the
insignificant whitewash streak with a far-reaching continent of
un-whitewashed fence, and sat down on a tree-box discouraged. Jim came
out at the gate with a tin pail and singing Buffalo Gals. Bringing
water from the town pump had always been hateful work in Tom's eyes
before, but now it did not strike him so. He remembered that there was
company at the pump. White, mulatto, and negro boys and girls were
always there waiting their turns, resting, trading, playthings,
quarreling, fighting, skylarking, and he remembered that although the
pump was only a hundred and fifty yards off, Jim never got back with a
bucket of water under an hour, and even then somebody generally had to
go after him. Tom said,
"'Say, Jim, I'll fetch the water if you'll whitewash some.'
Jim shook his head and said,
"'Can't, Mars Tom. Old Mrs. she told me I got to go and get this water
and stop fooling around with anybody. She say she spec'd Mars Tom
going to ask me to whitewash, and so she told me to go long and tend to
my own business. She loud she'd tend to whitewashing. Oh, never mind
what she said, Jim. That's the way she always talks. Give me the
bucket. I won't be gone only a minute. She won't ever know. Oh, I
dazzle Mars Tom. Old Mrs. she takin' tar to head off in me. Deed she
would.'
"'She never licks anybody, whacks him over the head with her thimble,
and who cares for that, I'd like to know. She talks awful, but talk
hurt. Anyways, it don't if she don't cry. Jim, I'll give you a marvel.
I'll give you a white alley.'
Jim began to wave her.
"'White alley, Jim. And it's a bully-tall.'
"'Mah, that's a mighty gay marvel, I tell you. But Mars Tom, I's
powerful, afraid old Mrs. and besides, if you will, I'll show you my
sore toe.' Jim was only human. This attraction was too much for him. He
put down his pail, took the white alley, and bent over the toe with
absorbing interest while the bandage was being unwound. In another
moment he was flying down the street with his pail and a tingling rear.
Tom was whitewashing with vigour, and Aunt Polly was retiring from the
field with a slipper in her hand and triumph in her eye. But Tom's
energy did not last. He began to think of the fun he had planned for
his day, and his sorrows multiplied. Soon the free boys would come
tripping along on all sorts of delicious expeditions, and they would
make a world of fun of him for having to work. The very thought of it
burnt him like fire. He got out his worldly wealth and examined it—bits
of toys, marbles, and trash—enough to buy an exchange of work, maybe,
but not half enough to buy so much as half an hour of pure freedom. So
he returned his straightened means to his pocket and gave up the idea of
trying to buy the boys. At this dark and hopeless moment an inspiration
burst upon him—nothing less than a great magnificent inspiration. He
took up his brush and went tranquilly to work. Ben Rogers hove in sight
presently—the very boy of all boys, whose ridicule he had been
dreading. Ben's gait was the hop, skip, and jump, proof enough that his
heart was light and his anticipations high. He was eating an apple, and
giving a long, melodious whoop at intervals, followed by a deep-toned
ding-dong-dong, ding-dong-dong, for he was personating a steamboat. As he
drew near he slackened speed, took the middle of the road, leaned far
over to starboard, and rounded to, ponderously and with laborious pomp
and circumstance, for he was personating the Big Missouri, and considered
himself to be drawing nine feet of water. He was boat and captain and
engine-bells combined, so he had to imagine himself standing on his own
hurricane deck giving the orders and executing them.
Stop her, sir! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! The headway ran almost out, and he
drew up slowly towards the sidewalk. Ship up to back! Ding-a-ling-a-ling!
His arms straightened and stiffened down his sides. Set her back on the
starboard! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chow! Chow! Chow! Chow! Chow! His right
hand, meantime, described stately circles, for it was representing a 40
foot wheel. Let her go back on the starboard! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chow!
Chow! Chow! The left hand began to describe circles. Stop the starboard!
Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Stop the starboard! Come ahead on the starboard!
Stop her! Let her outside! Turn her over slow! Ding-a-ling! Chow! Chow!
Get out that headline! Lively, now! Come! Come out of there with your
spring line! What are you about there? Take up a turn in that stump
with the bright of it! Stand by that stage! Now let her go! Done with
the engine, sir! Ding-a-ling-a-ling! Chit! Chit! Chit! Chit!
Trying the gauge-cocks, Tom went on whitewashing, paid no attention to
the steamboat. Ben stared a moment and then said,
Hi-ee! You're up a stump, ain't you?
No answer. Tom surveyed his last touch with the eye of an artist, then
he gave his brush another gentle sweep and surveyed the result as
before. Ben ranged up alongside of him. Tom's mouth watered for the
apple, but he stuck to his work. Ben said,
Hello, old chap! You got to work, eh?
Tom wheeled suddenly and said,
Why, it's you, Ben. I weren't noticing. Say, I'm going in a swimming.
I am. Don't you wish you could? But of course you'd rather work,
wouldn't you? Of course you would. Tom contemplated the boy a bit and
said,
What do you call work?
Why, ain't that work? Tom resumed his whitewashing and answered
carelessly,
Well, maybe it is and maybe it ain't. All I know is it suits Tom Sawyer.
Oh, come, now, you don't mean to let on that you like that.
The brush continued to move.
Like it? Well, I don't see why I oughtn't to like it. Does a boy get a
chance to whitewash a fence every day?
That put the thing in a new light. Ben stopped nibbling his apple.
Tom swept his brush daintily, back and forth, stepped back to note the
effect, added a touch here and there, criticized the effect again. Ben,
watching every move and getting more and more interested, more and
more absorbed. Presently he said,
Say, Tom, let me whitewash a little.
Tom considered, was about to consent, but he altered his mind.
No, no, I reckon it wouldn't hardly do, Ben. You see Aunt Polly's awful
particular about this fence, right here on the street, you know. But if
it was the back fence I wouldn't mind and she wouldn't. Yes, she's
awful particular about this fence. It's got to be done very careful. I
reckon there ain't one boy in a thousand—maybe two thousand—that
can do it the way it's got to be done.
No, is that so? Oh, come now, let me just try. Only just a little. I'd
let you if you was me, Tom.
Ben, I'd like to. Honest, Injun. But Aunt Polly—
Well, Jim wanted to do it, but she wouldn't let him. Sid wanted to do
it, and she wouldn't let Sid. Now, don't you see how I'm fixed? If you
was to tackle this fence and anything was to happen to it—aw, shucks,
I'll be just as careful. Now let me try. Say, I'll give you the core of
my apple.
Well, here. No, no, Ben, now don't. I'm afeard. I'll give you all of
it.
Tom gave up the brush with reluctance in his face, but alacrity in his
heart, and while the late steamer Big Missouri worked and sweated in
the sun, the retired artist sat on a barrel in the shade close by,
dangled his legs, munched his apple, and planned the slaughter of more
innocence. There was no lack of material. Boys happened along every
little while. They came to jeer, but remained to whitewash. By the time
Ben was fagged out, Tom had traded the next chance to Billy Fisher for
a kite in good repair. And when he played out, Johnny Miller bought in
for a dead rat on a string to swing it with, and so on and so on hour
after hour. And when the middle of the afternoon came, from being a
poor poverty-stricken boy in the morning, Tom was literally rolling in
wealth. He had beside the things before mentioned twelve marbles, part
of a Jew's harp, a piece of blue bottle-glass to look through, a spool
cannon, a key that wouldn't unlock anything, a fragment of chalk, a
glass stopper of a decanter, a tin soldier, a couple of tadpoles, six
firecrackers, a kitten with only one eye, a brass doorknob, a dog collar
but no dog, the handle of a knife, four pieces of orange peel, and a
dilapidated old window-sash. He had had a nice, good, idle time all the
while, plenty of company, and the fence had had three coats of
whitewash on it. If he hadn't run out of whitewash, he would have
bankrupted every boy in the village.
Tom said to himself that it was not such a hollow world after all. He
had discovered a great law of human action without knowing it, namely,
that in order to make a man or boy covet a thing, it is only necessary
to make the thing difficult to attain. If he had been a great and wise
philosopher, like the writer of this book, he would now have
comprehended that work consists of whatever a body is obliged to do,
and that play consists of whatever a body is not obliged to do. And
this would help him to understand why constructing artificial flowers
or performing on a treadmill is work, while rolling tenpins or climbing
Mont Blanc is only amusement. There are wealthy gentlemen in England
who drive four-horse passenger coaches twenty or thirty miles on a
daily line in the summer because the privilege costs them considerable
money. But if they were offered wages for the service, that would turn
it into work, and then they would resign. The boy mused a while over
the substantial change which had taken place in his worldly
circumstances, and then wended toward headquarters to report.
III.
Busy at War and Love.
Tom presented himself before Aunt Polly, who was sitting by an open
window in a pleasant rearward apartment which was bedroom, breakfast
dining-room, and library combined. The balmy summer air, the restful
quiet, the odour of the flowers, and the drowsing murmur of the bees
had had their effect, and she was nodding over her knitting, for she
had no company but the cat, and it was asleep in her lap.
Her spectacles were propped up on her grey head for safety. She had
thought that of course Tom had deserted long ago, and she wondered at
him place himself in her power again, in this intrepid way. He said,--"Meant
I go and play now, Aunt?"--"What,
already? How much have you done?"--"It's
all done, Aunt."--"Tom,
don't lie to me. I can't bear it."--"I ain't,
Aunt. It is all done." Aunt Polly placed small
trust in such evidence. She went out to see for herself, and she would
have been content to find twenty per cent of
Tom's statement true. When she found the entire fence whitewashed, and
not only whitewashed, but elaborately coated and recoated, and even a
streak added to the ground, her astonishment was almost unspeakable. She
said,--"Well, I never. There's no getting round it. You can work when
you're a-mind to, Tom." And then she diluted the compliment by adding,--"But
it's powerful seldom you're a-mind to, I'm bound to say. Well, go
along and play. But mind you get back some time in the week, or I'll
tan you."
She was so overcome by the splendour of his achievement that she took
him into the closet and selected a choice apple and delivered it to him,
along with an improving lecture upon the added value and flavour a treat
took to itself when it came without sin through virtuous effort. And
while she closed with a happy scriptural flourish, he hooked a doughnut.
Then he skipped out and saw Sid just starting up the outside stairway
that led to the back rooms on the second floor. Clods were handy, and
the air was full of them in a twinkling. They raged around Sid like a
hailstorm, and before Aunt Polly could collect her surprised faculties
and Sally to the rescue, six or seven clods had taken personal effect,
and Tom was over the fence and gone. There was a gate, but as a general
thing he was too crowded for time to make use of it. His soul was at
peace, now that he had settled with Sid for calling attention to his
black thread and getting him into trouble. Tom skirted the block and came
round into a muddy alley that led by the back of his aunt's cow-stable.
He presently got safely beyond the reach of capture and punishment and
hastened towards the public square of the village, where two military
companies of boys had met for conflict according to previous appointment.
Tom was general of one of these armies, Joe Harper, a bosom friend,
general of the other. These two great commanders did not condescend to
fight in person, that being better suited to the still smaller fry, but
sat together on an eminence and conducted the field operations by
orders delivered through aide-de-camp. Tom's army won a great victory
after a long and hard-fought battle. Then the dead were counted,
prisoners exchanged, the terms of the next disagreement agreed upon, and
the day for the necessary battle appointed. After which the armies fell
into line and marched away, and Tom turned homeward alone.
As he was passing by the house where Jeff Thatcher lived, he saw a new
girl in the garden, a lovely little blue-eyed creature with yellow hair
plaited into two long tails, white summer frock, and embroidered
pantilettes. The fresh-crowned hero fell without firing a shot. A
certain Amy Lawrence vanished out of his heart and left not even a
memory of herself behind. He had thought he loved her to distraction.
He had regarded his passion as adoration, and, behold, it was only a
poor little evanescent partiality. He had been months winning her, she
had confessed hardly a week ago. He had been the happiest and the
loudest boy in the world only seven short days, and here in one
instant of time she had gone out of his heart like a casual stranger
whose visit is done. He worshipped this new angel with furtive eye, till
he saw that she had discovered him. Then he pretended he did not know
she was present, and began to show off in all sorts of absurd boyish
ways in order to win her admiration. He kept up this grotesque
foolishness for some time, but by and by, while he was in the midst of
some dangerous gymnastic performances, he glanced aside and saw that
the little girl was wending her way toward the house. Tom came up to
the fence and leaned on it, grieving and hoping she would tarry yet a
while longer. She halted a moment on the steps and then moved toward
the door. Tom heaved a great sigh as she put her foot on the threshold.
But his face lit up right away, for she tossed a pansy over the fence a
moment before she disappeared.
The boy ran around and stopped within a foot or two of the flower, and
then shaded his eyes with his hand and began to look down street as if
he had discovered something of interest going on in that direction.
Presently he picked up a straw and began trying to balance it on his
nose, with his head tilted far back, and as he moved from side to side
in his efforts he edged nearer and nearer toward the pansy. Finally his
bare foot rested upon it, his pliant toes closed upon it, and he hopped
away with a treasure and disappeared round the corner. But only for a
minute, only while he could button the flower inside his jacket next
to his heart—or next to his stomach, possibly, for he was not much
posted in anatomy, and not hypercritical, anyway.
He returned now and hung about the fence till nightfall, showing off,
as before, but the girl never exhibited herself again, though Tom
comforted himself a little with the hope that she had been near some
window meantime and been aware of his attentions. Finally he rode home
reluctantly with his poor head full of visions.
All through supper his spirits were so high that his aunt wondered what
had got into the child. He took a good scolding about clotting Sid, and
did not seem to mind it in the least. He tried to steal sugar under his
aunt's very nose and got his knuckles wrapped for it. He said,
"'Aunt, you don't whack Sid when he takes it.' Well, Sid, don't torment
a body the way you do. You'd be always into that sugar if I weren't
watching you.' Presently she stepped into the kitchen, and Sid, happy in
his immunity, reached for the sugar bowl, a sort of glorying over Tom,
which was well nigh unbearable. But Sid's fingers slipped, and the bowl
dropped and broke. Tom was in ecstasies—in such ecstasies that he even
controlled his tongue and was silent. He said to himself that he would
not speak a word, even when his aunt came in, but would sit perfectly
still till she asked who did the mischief, and then he would tell, and
there would be nothing so good in the world as to see that pet model
catch it. He was so brimful of exultation that he could hardly hold
himself when the old lady came back and stood above the wreck discharging
lightnings of wrath from over her spectacles. He said to himself, "'Now
it's coming,' and the next instant he was sprawling on the floor. The
potent palm was uplifted to strike again when Tom cried out, "'Hold on
now! What are you belting me for? Sid broke it!' Aunt Polly paused,
perplexed, and Tom looked for healing pity. But when she got her tongue
again she only said, "'Oomph!' Well, you didn't get a lick amiss, I
reckon. You've been into some other odashes, mischief, when I wasn't
round like enough.' Then her conscience reproached her, and she yearned
to say something kind and loving, but she judged that this would be
construed into a confession that she had been in the wrong, and
disciplined for bad that. So she kept silence, and went about her
affairs with a troubled heart. Tom sulked in a corner and exalted his
woes. He knew that in her heart his aunt was on her knees to him, and
he was morosely gratified by the consciousness of it. He would hang out
with no signals. He would take notice of none. He knew that a yearning
glance fell upon him now and then through a film of tears, but he
refused recognition of it. He pictured himself lying sick unto death,
and his aunt bending over him, beseeching one little forgiving word,
but he would turn his face to the wall and die with that word unsaid.
Ah, how would she feel then? And he pictured himself brought home from
the river, dead, with his curls all wet and his sore heart at rest. How
she would throw herself upon him, and how her tears would fall like
rain, and her lips pray God to give her back her boy, and she would
never, never abuse him any more. But he would lie there, cold and white
and make no sign, a poor little sufferer whose griefs were at an end.
He so worked upon his feelings with the pathos of these dreams that he
had to keep swallowing. He was so like to choke. And his eyes swam in a
blur of water which overflowed when he winked, and ran down and trickled
from the end of his nose. And such a luxury to him was this petting of
his sorrows that he could not bear to have any worldly cheeriness or
any grating delight intrude upon it. It was too sacred for such contact.
And so, presently, when his cousin Mary danced in, all alive with the
joy of seeing home again after an age-long visit of one week to the
country, he got up and moved in clouds and darkness out at one door as
she brought song and sunshine in at the other.
He wandered far from the accustomed haunts of boys, and sought desolate
places that were in harmony with his spirit. A log raft in the river
invited him, and he seated himself on its outer edge, and contemplated
the dreary vastness of the stream, wishing the while that he could only
at once and unconsciously, without undergoing the uncomfortable routine
devised by nature. Then he thought of his flower. He got it out, rumpled
and wilted, and it mightily increased his dismal felicity. He wondered
if she would pity him if she knew. Would she cry, and wish that she had
a right to put her arms round his neck and comfort him? Or would she
turn coldly away like all the hollow world? This picture brought such
an agony of pleasurable suffering that he worked it over and over again
in his mind, and set it up in new and varied lights till he wore it
threadbare. At last he rose up, sighing, and departed in the darkness.
About half-past nine or ten o'clock he came along the deserted street
to where the adored unknown lived. He paused a moment. No sound fell
upon his listening ear. A candle was casting a dull glow upon the
curtain of a second-story window. Was the sacred presence there? He
climbed the fence, threaded his stealthy way through the plants till
he stood under that window. He looked up at it long and with emotion.
Then he laid him down on the ground under it, disposing himself upon
his back, with his hands clasped upon his breast and holding his poor
wilted flower. And thus he would die, out in the cold world, with no
shelter over his homeless head, no friendly hand to wipe the death
lamps from his brow, no loving face to bend pittingly over him when the
great agony came. And thus she would see him when she looked out upon
the glad morning, and, oh, would she drop one little tear upon his poor
lifeless form, would she heave one little sigh to see a bright young
life so rudely blighted, so untimely cut down. The window went up, a
maid-servant's discordant voice profaned the holy calm, and a deluge of
water drenched the prone martyr's remains. The strangling hero sprang up
with a relieving snort. There was a whiz as of a missile in the air,
mingled with a murmur of a curse, a sound as of shivering glass followed,
and a small vague form went over the fence and shot away in the gloom.
Not long after, as Tom, all undressed for bed, was surveying his
drenched garments by the light of a tallow-dip, Sid woke up. But if he
had any dim idea of making any references to illusions, he thought
better of it and held his peace, for there was danger in Tom's eye. Tom
turned in without the added vexation of prayers, and Sid made mental
note of the admission.
SHOWING OFF IN SUNDAY SCHOOL.
The sun rose upon a tranquil world and beamed down upon the peaceful
village like a benediction. Breakfast over, Aunt Polly had family
worship. It began with a prayer built from the ground up of solid
courses of scriptural quotations, welded together with a thin mortar of
originality. And from the summit of this she delivered a grim chapter
of the Mosaic Law, as from Sinai. Then Tom girded up his loins, so to
speak, and went to work to get his verses. Sid had learned his lesson
days before. Tom bent all his energies to the memorizing of five
verses, and he chose part of the Sermon on the Mount, because he could
find no verses that were shorter. At the end of half an hour Tom had a
vague general idea of his lesson, but no more, for his mind was
traversing the whole field of human thought, and his hands were busy
with distracting recreations. Mary took his book to hear him recite,
and he tried to find his way through the fog.
Blessed are the poor in spirit. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for
they theirs. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn, for they, oh, I don't know
what it is, shall, oh, shall, for they shall mourn. Blessed are they
that mourn, for they shall, uh, shall what? Why don't you tell me,
Mary? What do you want to be so mean for? Oh, Tom, you poor thick-headed
thing, I'm not teasing you, I wouldn't do that. You must go and learn
it again. Don't you be discouraged, Tom, you'll manage it, and if you do
I'll give you something ever so nice. There, now, that's a good boy.
All right, what is it, Mary? Tell me what it is. Never you mind, Tom,
you know if I say it's nice, it is nice. You bet you that's so, Mary,
all right, I'll tackle it again. And he did tackle it again, and under
the double pressure of curiosity and perspective gain, he did it with
such spirit that he accomplished a shining success. Mary gave him a
brand-new Barlow knife worth twelve and a half cents, and the
convulsion of delight that swept his system shook him to his
foundations. True, the knife would not cut anything, but it was a sure
enough Barlow, and there was inconceivable grandeur in that, though
where the Western boys ever got the idea that such a weapon could
possibly be counterfeited to its injury is an imposing mystery and will
always remain so, perhaps. Tom contrived to scarify the cupboard with
it, and was arranging to begin on the bureau, when he was called off to
dress for Sunday school.
Mary gave him a tin basin of water and a piece of soap, and he went
outside the door and set the basin on a little bench there. Then he
dipped the soap in the water and laid it down, turned up his sleeves,
poured out the water on the ground gently, and then entered the kitchen
and began to wipe his face diligently on the towel behind the door. But
Mary removed the towel and said,
"'Now ain't you ashamed, Tom? You mustn't be so bad. Water won't hurt
you.' Tom was a trifle disconcerted. The basin was refilled, and this
time he stood over it a little while, gathering resolution, took in a
big breath, and began. When he entered the kitchen presently, with both
eyes shut and groping for the towel with his hands, an honourable
testimony of suds and water was dripping from his face. But when he
emerged from the towel he was not yet satisfactory, for the clean
territory stopped short at his chin and his jaws like a mask. Below
and beyond this line there was a dark expanse of unirrigated soil that
spread downward in front and backward around his neck. Mary took him in
hand, and when she was done with him he was a man and a brother without
distinction of colour, and his saturated hair was neatly brushed and its
short curls wrought into a dainty and symmetrical general effect. He
privately smoothed out the curls with labour and difficulty and
plastered his hair close down to his head, for he held curls to be
effeminate, and his own filled his life with bitterness. Then Mary got
out a suit of his clothing that had been used only on Sundays during two
years. They were simply called his other clothes, and so by that we know
the size of his wardrobe. The girl put him to rights after he had dressed
himself, she buttoned his neat roundabout up to his chin, turned his
vast shirt collar down over his shoulders, brushed him off and crowned
him with his speckled straw hat. He now looked exceedingly improved and
uncomfortable. He was fully as uncomfortable as he looked, for there was
a restraint about whole clothes and cleanliness that galled him. He
hoped that Mary would forget his shoes, but the hope was blighted. She
coated them thoroughly with tallow, as was the custom, and brought them
out. He lost his temper and said he was always being made to do
everything he didn't want to do, but Mary said persuasively,
"'Please, Tom, that's a good boy.' So he got into the shoes, snarling.
Mary was soon ready, and the three children set out for Sunday school,
a place that Tom hated with his whole heart, but Sid and Mary were fond
of. Sabbath school hours were from nine to half-past ten, and then
church service. Two of the children always remained for the sermon
voluntarily, and the other always remained too, for stronger reasons.
The church's high-backed, uncushioned pews would seat about three
hundred persons. The edifice was but a small plain affair, with a sort
pine-bored tree-box on top of it, for a steeple. At the door, Tom
dropped back a step and accosted a Sunday-dressed comrade.
"'Say, Billy, got a yaller ticket?'
"'Yes.'
"'Well, you take for her.'
"'Well, you give.'
"'Piece of licorice and a fish-hook. Let's see them.'
Tom exhibited. They were satisfactory, and the property changed hands.
Then Tom traded a couple of white alleys for three red tickets, and
some small trifle or other for a couple of blue ones.
He waylaid other boys as they came, and went on buying tickets of
various colors ten or fifteen minutes longer. He entered the church,
now with a swarm of clean and noisy boys and girls, proceeded to his
seat, and started a quarrel with the first boy that came handy. The
teacher, a grave elderly man, interfered, then turned his back a
moment, and Tom pulled a boy's hair in the next bench, and was
absorbed in his book when the boy turned round. Stuck a pin in another
boy presently in order to hear him say, Ouch!, and got a new reprimand
from his teacher. Tom's whole class were of a pattern, restless, noisy,
and troublesome. When they came to recite their lessons, not one of
them knew his verses perfectly, but had to be prompted all along.
However, they worried through, and each got his reward in small blue
tickets, each with a passage of scripture on it. Each blue ticket was
two verses of the recitation. Ten blue tickets equaled a red one, and
could be exchanged for it. Ten red tickets equaled a yellow one. For
ten yellow tickets the superintendent gave a very plainly bound Bible
worth forty cents in those easy days to the pupil. How many of my
readers would have the industry and application to memorize two thousand
verses even for a Doray Bible, and yet Mary had acquired two Bibles in
this way? It was the patient work of two years, and a boy of German
parentage had won four or five. He once recited three thousand verses
without stopping. But the strain upon his mental faculties was too
great, and he was little better than an idiot from that day forth. A
grievous misfortune for the school, for on great occasions before
company the superintendent, as Tom expressed it, had always made this
boy come out and spread himself. Only the older pupils managed to keep
their tickets and stick to their tedious work long enough to get a
Bible, and so the delivery of one of these prizes was a rare and
noteworthy circumstance. The successful pupil was so great and
conspicuous for that day that on the spot every scholar's heart was
fired with a fresh ambition that often lasted a couple of weeks. It is
possible that Tom's mental stomach had never really hungered for one
of those prizes. But unquestionably his entire being had for many a
day longed for the glory and the eclat that came with it. In due course
the superintendent stood up in front of the pulpit with a closed hymn
book in his hand, and his forefinger inserted between its leaves, and
commanded attention. When a Sunday school superintendent makes his
customary little speech, a hymn book in the hand is as necessary as is
the inevitable sheet of music in the hand of a singer who stands
forward on the platform and sings a solo at a concert. Though why is a
mystery, for neither the hymn book nor the sheet of music is ever
referred to by the sufferer. This superintendent was a slim creature of
thirty-five, with a sandy goatee and short sandy hair. He wore a stiff
standing collar whose upper edge almost reached his ears, and whose
sharp points curved forward abreast the corners of his mouth, a fence
that compelled a straight look out ahead and a turning of the whole body
when a side view was required. His chin was propped on a spreading
cravat which was as broad and as long as a bank-note, and had fringed
ends. His boot-toes were turned sharply up, in the fashion of the day,
like sleigh-runners, an effect patiently and laboriously produced by
the young men by sitting with their toes pressed against a wall for
hours together. Mr. Walters was very earnest of mien, and very sincere
and honest at heart. And he held sacred things and places in such
reverence, and so separated them from worldly matters, that unconsciously
to himself his Sunday-school voice had acquired a peculiar intonation,
which was wholly absent on week-days. He began after this fashion,
"'Now, children, I want you all to sit up just as straight and pretty as
you can, and give me all your attention for a minute or two. There,
that is it. That is the way good little boys and girls should do. I see
one little girl who is looking out of the window. I am afraid she thinks
I am out there somewhere, perhaps up in one of the trees making a speech
to the little birds.' A plosive titter.
"'I want to tell you how good it makes me feel to see so many bright
clean little faces assembled in a place like this, learning to do right
and be good,' and so forth and so on. It is not necessary to set down
the rest of the oration. It was of a pattern which does not vary, and so
it is familiar to us all. The latter third of the speech was marred by
the resumption of fights and other recreations among certain of the bad
boys, and by fidgetings and whisperings that extended far and wide,
washing even to the bases of isolated and incorruptible rocks like Sid
and Mary. But now every sound ceased suddenly, with the subsidence of
Mr. Walter's voice and the conclusion of the speech was received with a
burst of silent gratitude. A good part of the whispering had been
occasioned by an event which was more or less rare—the entrance of
visitors, lawyer Thatcher, accompanied by a very feeble and aged man, a
fine, portly middle-aged gentleman with iron-grey hair, and a dignified
lady who was doubtless the latter's wife. The lady was leading a child.
Tom had been restless and full of chaffings and repinings, conscience
smitten too—he could not meet Amy Lawrence's eye—he could not brook
her loving gaze. But when he saw this small newcomer his soul was all
ablaze with bliss in a moment. The next moment he was showing off with
all his might, cuffing boys, pulling hair, making faces—in a word,
using every art that seemed likely to fascinate a girl and win her
applause. His exultations had but one alloy—the memory of his
humiliation in this angel's garden—and that record in sand was fast
washing out under the waves of happiness that were sweeping over it
now. The visitors were given the highest seat of honour, and as soon as
Mr. Walter's speech was finished he introduced them to the school. The
middle-aged man turned out to be a prodigious personage, no less a one
than the county judge, altogether the most august creation these
children had ever looked upon, and they wondered what kind of material
he was made of, and they half wanted to hear him roar, and were half
afraid he might too. He was from Constantinople, twelve miles away, so
he had travelled, and seen the world. These very eyes had looked upon
the county courthouse, which was said to have a tin roof. The awe which
these reflections inspired was attested by the impressive silences and
the ranks of staring eyes. This was the great Judge Thatcher, brother of
their own lawyer. Jeff Thatcher immediately went forward to be familiar
with the great man, and be envied by the school. It would have been
music to his soul to hear the whisperings,
"'Look at him, Jim, he's a-goin' up there. Say, look, he's a-goin' to
shake hands with him. He is shakin' hands with him. By jinx, don't you
wish you was Jeff?' Mr. Walters fell to showing off, with all sorts of
official bustlings and activities, giving orders and delivering judgments,
discharging directions here, there, everywhere, that he could find a
target. The librarian showed off, running hither and thither with his
arms full of books, and making a deal of the splutter and fuss that
insect authority delights in. The young lady-teacher showed off, bending
sweetly over pupils that were lately being boxed, lifting pretty warning
fingers at bad little boys, and patting good ones lovingly. The young
gentleman-teachers showed off with small scoldings and other little
displays of authority and fine attention to discipline, and most of the
teachers of both sexes found business up at the library by the pulpit.
And it was business that frequently had to be done over again two or
three times, with much seeming vexation. The little girls showed off in
various ways, and the little boys showed off with such diligence that
the air was thick with paper wads and the murmur of scuffling. And above
it all the great man sat and beamed a majestic judicial smile upon all
the house, and warmed himself in the sun of his own grandeur, for he was
showing off, too.
There was only one thing wanting to make Mr. Walters' ecstasy complete,
and that was a chance to deliver a Bible prize and exhibit a prodigy.
Several pupils had a few yellow tickets, but none had enough, and he had
been around among the star pupils inquiring. He would have given worlds
now to have that German lad back again with a sound mind. And now at this
moment, when hope was dead, Tom Sawyer came forward with nine yellow
tickets, nine red tickets, and ten blue ones, and demanded a Bible. This
was a thunderbolt out of a clear sky. Walters was not expecting an
application from this source for the next ten years, but there was no
getting around it. Here were the certified checks, and they were good
for their face. Tom was therefore elevated to a place with a judge and
the other elect, and the great news was announced from headquarters. It
was the most stunning surprise of the decade, and so profound was the
sensation that it lifted the new hero up to the judicial one's altitude,
and the school had two marvels to gaze upon in place of one. The boys
were all eaten up with envy, and those that suffered the bitterest pangs
were those who perceived too late that they themselves had contributed to
this hated splendour by trading tickets to Tom for the wealth he had
amassed in selling whitewashing privileges. These despised themselves as
being the dupes of a wily fraud, a guileful snake in the grass. The
prize was delivered to Tom with as much effusion as the superintendent
could pump up under the circumstances, but it lacked somewhat of the
true gush, for the poor fellow's instinct taught him that there was a
mystery here that could not well bear the light, perhaps. It was simply
preposterous that this boy had warehoused two thousand sheaves of
scriptural wisdom on his premises. A dozen would strain his capacity
without a doubt. Amy Lawrence was proud and glad, and she tried to make
Tom see it in her face, but he wouldn't look. She wondered. Then she was
just a grain troubled. Next a dim suspicion came and went, came again.
She watched, a furtive glance told her worlds, and then her heart broke,
and she was jealous, and angry, and the tears came, and she hated
everybody. Tom, most of all, she thought. Tom was introduced to the
judge, but his tongue was tied, his breath would hardly come, his heart
quaked, partly because of the awful greatness of the man, but mainly
because he was her parent. He would have liked to fall down and worship
him if it were in the dark. The judge put his hand on Tom's head and
called him a fine little man, and asked him what his name was. The boy
stammered, gasped, and got it out.
Tom.
Oh, no, not Tom. It is—
Thomas.
Ah, that's it. I thought there was more to it, maybe. That's very well.
But you've another one, I dare say. And you'll tell it to me, won't you?
Tell the gentleman your other name, Thomas, said Walters, and say Sir—you
mustn't forget your manners—Thomas Sawyer, Sir. That's it. That's a
good boy. Fine, boy, fine manly little fellow. Two thousand verses is a
great many, very, very great many, and you never can be sorry for the
trouble you took to learn them. For knowledge is worth more than
anything there is in the world. It's what makes great men and good men.
You'll be a great man and a good man yourself some day, Thomas, and then
you'll look back and say, it's all owing to the precious Sunday school
privileges of my boyhood. It's all owing to my dear teachers that taught
me to learn. It's all owing to the good superintendent who encouraged me
and watched over me and gave me a beautiful Bible—a splendid, elegant
Bible to keep and have it all for my own, always. It's all owing to right
That is what you will say, Thomas, and you wouldn't take any money for
those two thousand verses, no, indeed you wouldn't. And now you wouldn't
mind telling me and this lady some of the things you've learned. No, I
know you wouldn't, for we are proud of little boys that learn. Now, no
doubt you know the names of all the twelve disciples. Won't you tell us
the names of the first two that were appointed?
Tom was tugging at a button-hole and looking sheepish. He blushed now,
and his eyes fell. Mr. Walter's heart sank within him. He said to
himself, it is not possible that the boy can answer the simplest
question. Why did the judge ask him? Yet he felt obliged to speak up
and say,
"'Answer the gentleman, Thomas. Don't be afraid.' Tom still hung fire.
Now I know you'll tell me,' said the lady. The names of the first two
disciples were David and Goliath.
Let us draw the curtain of charity over the rest of the scene. End of
V. The Pinch-Bug and His Prey.
About half-past ten the cracked bell of the small church began to ring, and presently
the people began to gather for the morning sermon. The Sunday-school children distributed
themselves about the house, and occupied pews with their parents, so as to be under supervision.
Aunt Polly came, and Tom and Sid and Mary sat with her, Tom being placed next to the
aisle, in order that he might be as far away from the open window and the seductive outside
summer scenes as possible. The crowd filed up the aisles, the aged and needy postmaster,
who had seen better days, the mayor and his wife, for they had a mayor there, among other
unnecessary, the justice of the peace, the widow Douglas, fair, smart and forty, a generous
good-hearted soul and well-to-do, her hill mansion the only palace in the town, and the
most hospitable and much the most lavish in the matter of festivities that St. Petersburg
could boast, the bent and venerable major and Mrs. Ward, lawyer Riverson, they knew
notable from a distance, next the bell of the village, followed by a troop of lawn-clad
and ribbon-decked young heartbreakers, then all the young clerks in town in a body, for
they had stood in the vestibule sucking their cane-heads, a circling wall of oiled and simpering
admirers till the last girl had run their gauntlet.
And last of all came the model-boy, Willie Mufferson, taking as heedful care of his mother
as if she were cut glass. He always brought his mother to church, and was the pride of
all the matrons. The boys all hated him, he was no good. And besides, he had been thrown
up to them so much. His white handkerchief was hanging out of his pocket behind, as usual
on Sundays, accidentally. Tom had no handkerchief, and he looked upon boys who had as snobs.
The congregation, being fully assembled now, the bell rang once more, to warn laggards
and stragglers, and then a solemn hush fell upon the church, which was only broken by
the tittering and whispering of the choir in the gallery. The choir always tittered
and whispered all through service. There was once a church choir that was not ill-bred,
but I have forgotten where it was now. It was a great many years ago, and I can scarcely
remember anything about it, but I think it was in some foreign country.
The minister gave out the hymn, and read it through with a relish in a peculiar style,
which was much admired in that part of the country. His voice began on a medium key,
and climbed steadily up till it reached a certain point where it bore with strong emphasis
the topmost word, and then plunged down as if from a spring-board.
Shall I be carried to the skies On flowery beds of ease,
Whilst others fight to win the prize And sail through bloody seas?
He was regarded as a wonderful reader. At church, sociables, he was always called upon
to read poetry, and when he was through, the ladies would lift up their hands and let
them fall helplessly in their laps, and wall their eyes and shake their heads as much as
to say, Words cannot express it, it is too beautiful, too beautiful for this mortal earth.
After the hymn had been sung, the reverend Mr. Sprague turned himself into a bulletin-board,
and read off notices of meetings and societies and things, till it seemed that the list would
stretch out to the crack of doom, a queer custom which is still kept up in America even
in cities away here in this age of abundant newspapers. Often the less there is to justify
a traditional custom, the harder it is to get rid of it.
And now the minister prayed. A good, generous prayer it was, and went into details. It pleaded
for the church and the little children of the church, for the other churches of the
village, for the village itself, for the county, for the state, for the state officers, for
the United States, for the churches of the United States, for Congress, for the president,
for the officers of the government, for poor sailors tossed by stormy seas, for the oppressed
millions groaning under the heel of European monarchies and Oriental despotisms, for such
as have the light and the good tidings, and yet have not eyes to see nor ears to hear
withal, for the heathen in the far islands of the sea, and closed with a supplication
that the words he was about to speak might find grace and favour, and be as seeds sown
in fertile ground, yielding in time a grateful harvest of good. Amen.
There was a rustling of dresses, and the standing congregation sat down. The boy whose history
this book relates did not enjoy the prayer. He only endured it, if he even did that much.
He was restive all through it. He kept tally of the details of the prayer unconsciously,
for he was not listening, but he knew the ground of old and the clergyman's regular
route over it, and when a little trifle of new matter was interlarded, his ear detected
it, and his whole nature resented it. He considered additions unfair and scoundrelly.
In the midst of the prayer a fly had lit on the back of the pew in front of him, and
tortured his spirit by calmly rubbing its hands together, embracing its head with its
arms, and polishing it so vigorously that it seemed to almost part company with the
body, and the slender thread of a neck was exposed to view, scraping its wings with its
hind legs and smoothing them to its body as if they had been coattails, going through
its whole toilet as tranquilly as if it knew it was perfectly safe, as indeed it was,
for as sorely as Tom's hands itched to grab for it, they did not dare. He believed his
soul would be instantly destroyed if he did such a thing while the prayer was going on,
but with the closing sentence his hand began to curve and steel forward, and the instant
the Amen was out the fly was a prisoner of war. His aunt detected the act and made him
let it go.
The minister gave out his text and droned along monotonously through an argument that
was so prosy that many ahead by and by began to nod, and yet it was an argument that dealt
in limitless fire and brimstone and thinned the predestined elect down to a company so
small as to be hardly worth the saving. Tom counted the pages of the sermon. After church
he always knew how many pages there had been, but he seldom knew anything else about the
discourse. However, this time he was really interested for a little while. The minister
made a grand and moving picture of the assembling together of the world's hosts at the millennium,
when the lion and the lamb should lie down together and a little child should lead them.
But the pathos, the lesson, the moral of the great spectacle were lost upon the boy. He
only thought of the conspicuousness of the principal character before the onlooking nations.
His face lit with the thought, and he said to himself that he wished he could be that
child if it was a tame lion.
Now he lapsed into suffering again, as the dry argument was resumed. Presently he bethought
him of a treasure he had and got it out. It was a large black beetle with formidable jaws—a
pinch bug, he called it. It was in a percussion cap box. The first thing the beetle did was
take him by the finger. A natural Philip followed. The beetle went floundering into the aisle
and lit on its back, and the hurt finger went into the boy's mouth. The beetle lay there
working its helpless legs, unable to turn over. Tom eyed it and longed for it, but it
was safe out of his reach.
Other people uninterested in the sermon found relief in the beetle, and they eyed it too.
Presently a vagrant poodle dog came idling along, sad at heart, lazy with the summer
and the quiet, weary of captivity, sighing for change. He spied the beetle. The drooping
tail lifted and wagged. He surveyed the prize, walked around it, smelt at it from a safe
distance, walked around it again, grew bolder, and took a closer smell. Then lifted his lip
and made a gingerly snatch at it, just missing it, made another and another, began to enjoy
the diversion, subsided to his stomach with the beetle between his paws, and continued
his experiments. Grew weary at last, and then indifferent and absent-minded.
His head nodded, and little by little his chin descended and touched the enemy who seized
it. There was a sharp yelp, a flirt of the poodle's head, and the beetle fell a couple
of yards away and lit on its back once more. The neighboring spectators shook with a gentle
inward joy, several faces went behind fans and handkerchiefs, and Tom was entirely happy.
The dog looked foolish and probably felt so, but there was resentment in his heart, too,
and a craving for revenge. So he went to the beetle and began a wary attack on it again,
jumping at it from every point of a circle, lighting with his forepaws within an inch
of the creature, making even closer snatches at it with his teeth, and jerking his head
till his ears flapped again. But he grew tired once more, after a while, tried to amuse himself
with a fly, but found no relief, followed an ant around with his nose close to the floor,
and quickly wearied of that, yawned, sighed, forgot the beetle entirely, and sat down on
it.
Then there was a wild yelp of agony, and the poodle went sailing up the aisle. The yelps
continued, and so did the dog. He crossed the house in front of the altar. He flew down
the other aisle. He crossed before the doors. He clamored up the homestretch. His anguish
grew with his progress, till presently he was but a woolly comet moving in its orbit
with a gleam and the speed of light. At last the frantic sufferer sheered from its course
and sprang into its master's lap. He flung it out of the window, and the voice of distress
quickly thinned away and died in the distance. By this time the whole church was red-faced
and suffocating with suppressed laughter, and the sermon had come to a dead standstill.
The discourse was resumed presently, but it went lame and halting, all possibility of
impressiveness being at an end. For even the gravest sentiments were constantly being received
with a smothered burst of unholy mirth, under cover of some remote pew-back, as if the poor
parson had said a rarely facetious thing. It was a genuine relief to the whole congregation
when the ordeal was over and the benediction pronounced. Tom Sawyer went home quite cheerful,
thinking to himself that there was some satisfaction about divine service when there was a bit
of variety in it. He had but one marring thought. He was willing that the dog should play with
his pinch-bug, but he did not think it was upright in him to carry it off.
TOM MEETS BECKY
Monday morning found Tom Sawyer miserable. Monday morning always found him so, because
it began another week's slow suffering in school. He generally began that day with wishing
he had had no intervening holiday. It made the going into captivity in fetters again
so much more odious. Tom lay thinking. Presently it occurred to him that he wished he was sick,
then he could stay home from school. Here was a vague possibility. He canvassed his
system. No ailment was found, and he investigated again. This time he thought he could detect
colicky symptoms, and he began to encourage them with considerable hope. But they soon
grew feeble and presently died wholly away. He reflected further. Suddenly he discovered
something. One of his upper front teeth was loose. This was lucky. He was about to begin
to groan as a starter, as he called it, when it occurred to him that if he came into court
with that argument, his aunt would pull it out, and that would hurt. So he thought he
would hold a tooth in reserve for the present, and seek further. Nothing offered for some
little time, and then he remembered hearing the doctor tell about a certain thing that
laid up a patient for two or three weeks, and threatened to make him lose a finger.
So the boy eagerly drew his sore toe from under the sheet, and held it up for inspection.
But now he did not know the necessary symptoms. However, it seemed well worth while to chance
it, so he fell to groaning with considerable spirit. But Sid slept on unconscious. Tom
groaned louder, and fancied that he began to feel pain in the toe. No result from Sid.
Tom was panting with his exertions by this time. He took a rest, and then swelled himself
up and fetched a succession of admirable groans. Sid snored on.
Tom was aggravated. He said,
"'Sid! Sid!' and shook him. This course worked well, and Tom began to groan again. Sid yawned,
stretched, then brought himself up on his elbow with a snort, and began to stare at
Tom. Tom went on groaning, and Sid said,
"'Tom! Say, Tom!' No response.
"'Here, Tom. Tom! What is the matter, Tom?' And he shook him and looked in his face anxiously.
Tom moaned out,
"'Oh! Don't, Sid! Don't joggle me!'
"'Why, what's the matter, Tom? I must call Auntie.'
"'No, never mind. It'll be over by and by, maybe. Don't call anybody.'
"'But I must.'
"'Don't groan so, Tom. It's awful. How long you been this way?'
"'Hours.'
"'Ouch! Oh, don't stir so, Sid. You'll kill me.'
"'Tom, why didn't you wake me sooner?'
"'Oh, Tom, don't. It makes my flesh crawl to hear you. Tom, what is the matter?'
"'I forgive you everything, Sid. Oh, everything you ever done to me. When I'm gone.'
"'Tom, you ain't dying, are you?'
"'Don't, Tom. Oh, don't. Maybe.'
"'Oh, I forgive everything, Sid. Oh, tell him so, Sid. And, Sid, you give my window
sash, and my cat with one eye to that new girl that's come to town, and tell her—'
But Sid had snatched his clothes and gone. Tom was suffering in reality now, so handsomely
was his imagination working, and so his groans had gathered quite a genuine tone. Sid flew
downstairs and said,
"'Oh, Aunt Polly, come! Tom's dying!'
"'Dying?'
"'Yes, and don't wait. Come, quick! Rubbish! I don't believe it!'
But she fled upstairs, nevertheless, with Sid and Mary at her heels, and her face grew
white too, and her lip trembled. When she reached the bedside, she gasped out,
"'You, Tom! Tom, what's the matter with you?'
"'Oh, Auntie, I'm—what's the matter with you? What is the matter with you, child?'
"'Oh, Auntie, my sore toe's mortified!'
The old lady sank down into the chair and laughed a little, then cried a little, then
did both together. This restored her, and she said,
"'Tom, what a turn you did give me! Now you shut up that nonsense and climb out of this!'
The groans ceased, and the pain vanished from the toe. The boy felt a little foolish, and
he said,
"'Aunt Polly, it seemed mortified, and it hurt so I never minded my tooth at all.'
"'Your tooth, indeed. What's the matter with your tooth?'
"'One of them's loose, and it aches perfectly awful.'
"'There, there, now, don't begin that groaning again. Open your mouth. Well, your tooth
is loose, but you're not going to die about that. Mary, get me a silk thread, and a chunk
of fire out of the kitchen.'
Tom said,
"'Oh, please, Auntie, don't pull it out. It don't hurt any more. I wish I may never stir
if it does. Please don't, Auntie. I don't want to stay home from school.'
"'Oh, you don't, don't you? So all this raw was because you thought you'd get to stay
home from school and go fishing. Tom, Tom, I love you so, and you seem to try every
way you can to break my old heart with your outrageousness.'
By this time the dental instruments were ready. The old lady made one end of the silk thread
fast to Tom's tooth with a loop, and tied the other to the bed-post. Then she seized
the chunk of fire, and suddenly thrust it almost into the boy's face, the tooth hung
dangling by the bed-post now.
But all trials bring their compensations. As Tom wended to school after breakfast, he
was the envy of every boy he met because the gap in his upper row of teeth enabled him
to expectorate in a new and admirable way. He gathered quite a following of lads interested
in the exhibition, and one that had cut his finger and had been a centre of fascination
and homage up to this time, now found himself suddenly without an adherent and shorn of
his glory. His heart was heavy, and he said with a disdain which he did not feel that
it wasn't anything to spit like Tom Sawyer, but another boy said, Sour Grapes, and he
wandered away a dismantled hero.
Shortly Tom came upon the juvenile pariah of the village, Huckleberry Finn, son of the
town drunkard. Huckleberry was cordially hated and dreaded by all the mothers of the town,
because he was idle, and lawless, and vulgar, and bad, and because all their children admired
him so, and delighted in his forbidden society, and wished they dared to be like him. Tom
was like the rest of the respectable boys in that he envied Huckleberry his gaudy outcast
condition, and was under strict orders not to play with him, so he played with him every
time he got a chance. Huckleberry was always dressed in the cast-off clothes of full-grown
men, and they were in perennial bloom and fluttering with rags. His hat was a vast ruin
with a wide crescent lopped out of its brim. His coat, when he wore one, hung nearly to
his heels, and had the rearward buttons far down the back, but one suspender supported
his trousers. The seat of the trousers bagged low and contained nothing, the fringed legs
dragged in the dirt when not rolled up.
Huckleberry came and went at his own free will. He slept on doorsteps in fine weather
and in empty hogsheads and wet. He did not have to go to school or to church, or call
any being master or obey anybody. He could go fishing or swimming when and where he chose,
and stay as long as it suited him. Nobody forbade him to fight. He could sit up as late
as he pleased. He was always the first boy that went barefoot in the spring, and the
to resume leather in the fall. He never had to wash nor put on clean clothes. He could
swear wonderfully. In a word, everything that goes to make life precious, that boy had.
So thought every harassed, hampered, respectable boy in St. Petersburg. Tom hailed the romantic
outcast.
"'Hullo, Huckleberry! Hello yourself, and see how you like it. What's that you got?
Dead cat. Let me see him, Huck. My, he's pretty stiff. Where'd you get him?'
"'Bought him off in a boy.'
"'What'd you give?'
"'I give a blue ticket and a bladder that I got at the slaughterhouse.'
"'Where'd you get the blue ticket?'
"'Bought it off in Ben Rogers two weeks ago for a hoop-stick.'
"'Say, what is dead cats good for, Huck?'
"'Good for? Pure warts with.'
"'No, is that so? I know something that's better.'
"'I bet you don't. What is it? Why, spunk-water.'
"'Spunk-water? I wouldn't give a durn for spunk-water. You wouldn't, wouldn't you? Do you ever try
it?'
"'No, I ain't. But Bob Tanner did.'
"'Who told you so? Why, he told Jeff Thatcher, and Jeff told Johnny Baker, and Johnny told
Jim Hollis, and Jim told Ben Rogers, and Ben told a nigger, and the nigger told me there
now.'
"'Well, whatever. They'll all lie. Least wise, all but the nigger. I don't know him. But
I never see a nigger that wouldn't lie. Shucks. Now you tell me how Bob Tanner done it, Huck.'
"'Why, he took and dipped his hand in a rotten stump where the rain-water was. In the day-time?
Certainly. With his face to the stump? Yes. Least I reckon so.'
"'Did he say anything? I don't reckon he did. I don't know. Ah ha! Talk about trying
to cure warts with spunk-water such a blameful way as that. Why, that ain't it going to do
any good. You gotta go all by yourself to the middle of the woods where you know there's
a spunk-water stump, and just as it's midnight, you back up against the stump and jam your
hand in and say, "'Barley-corn, barley-corn, Injun-meal shorts, spunk-water, spunk-water,
swallow these warts,' and then walk away quick, eleven steps, with your eyes shut, and then
turn around three times and walk home without speaking to anybody. Because if you speak,
the charm's busted.'
"'Well, that sounds like a good way, but that ain't the way Bob Tanner done.'
"'No, sir, you can bet he didn't, because he's the wardiest boy in this town, and he
wouldn't have a wart on him if he'd known how to work spunk-water.'
"'I've took thousands of warts off my hands that way, Huck. I play with frogs so much
I've always got considerable many warts. Sometimes I take them off with a bean.'
"'Yes, bean's good. I've done that. Have you? What's your way?'
"'You take and split the bean and cut the wart so as to get some blood, and then you
put the blood on one piece of the bean and take and dig a hole and bury it about midnight
at the crossroads in the dark of the moon, and then you burn up the rest of the bean.
You see, that piece that's got the blood on it will keep drawing and drawing, trying to
fetch the other piece to it, and so that helps the blood to draw the wart. And pretty soon
off she comes.'
"'Yes, that's it, Huck, that's it. Though when you're burying it, if you say, Down bean,
off wart, come no more to bother me, it's better. That's the way Joe Harper does, and
he's been nearly to Coonville and most everywhere's. But say, how do you cure him with dead cats?'
"'Why, you take your cat and go and get in the graveyard long about midnight when somebody
that was wicked has been buried. And when it's midnight a devil will come, or maybe
two or three, but you can't see him. You can only hear something like the wind, or maybe
hear him talk. And when they're taking that feller away, you heave your cat after him
and say, Devil follow corpse, cat follow devil, warts follow cat, I'm done with you. And that'll
fetch any wart.'
"'Sounds right. Do you ever try it, Huck?'
"'No, but old Mother Hopkins told me.'
"'Well, I reckon it's so, then, because they say she's a witch.'
"'Say?'
"'Why, Tom, I know she is. She witched Pap. Pap says so his own self. He come along one
day, and he sees she was a witch in him, so he took up a rock, and if she hadn't dodged
he'd a got her. Well, that very night he rolled off in the shed where he was a-laying drunk
and broke his arm.'
"'Why, that's awful. How did he know she was a witch in him?'
"'Lord, Pap can tell easy. Pap says when they keep looking at you right stidy, they're
witching you, especially if they mumble, because when they mumble they're saying the Lord's
Prayer backwards. Say, Huckie, when you going to try the cat?'
"'To-night. I reckon they'll come after old Hoss Williams to-night.'
"'But they buried him Saturday. Didn't they get him Saturday night?'
"'Why, how you talk. How could their charms work till midnight, and then it's Sunday?
Devils don't slosh round much of a Sunday, I don't reckon. I never thought of that.
That's so. Let me go with you.'
"'Of course, if he ain't afeard.'
"'Afeard? Taint likely. Will you meow?'
"'Yes, and you meow back, if you get a chance. Last time you kept me a-meowing around till
old Hayes went to throwing rocks at me and says, "'Darn that cat!' and so I hove a
brick through his window. But don't you tell?'
"'I won't. I couldn't meow that night because Auntie was watching me. But I'll meow this
time. Say, what's that?'
"'Nothin' but a tick. Where'd you get him? Out in the woods.'
"'What'll you take for him?'
"'I don't know. I don't want to sell him. All right. It's a mighty small tick, anyway.
Oh, anybody can run a tick down that don't belong to them. I'm satisfied with it. It's
a good enough tick for me. Show! There's ticks aplenty. I could have a thousand of them if
I wanted to.'
"'Well, why don't you? Because you know mighty well you can't. This is a pretty early tick,
I reckon. It's the first one I've seen this year. Say, Huck, I'll give you my tooth for
him. Let's see it.'
Tom got on a bit of paper and carefully unrolled it. Huckleberry viewed it wistfully. The temptation
was very strong. At last he said, "'Is it genuine?' Tom lifted his lip and showed the
vacancy.
"'Well, all right,' said Huckleberry. "'It's a trade.' Tom enclosed the tick in the percussion
cat-box that had lately been the Pinchbugs' prison, and the boys separated, each feeling
wealthier than before. When Tom reached the little isolated frame schoolhouse he strode
in briskly, with the manner of one who had come with all honest speed. He hung his hat
on a peg and flung himself into a seat with businesslike alacrity. The master, thrown
on high in his great splint-bottom arm-chair, was dozing, lulled by the drowsy hum of study.
The interruption roused him.
"'TOMMAS SOYER?' Tom knew that when his name was pronounced in full it meant trouble.
"'Sir, come up here. Now, sir, why are you late again, as usual?'
Tom was about to take refuge in a lie when he saw two long tails of yellow hair hanging
down a back that he recognized by the electric sympathy of love, and by that form was the
only vacant place on the girls' side of the schoolhouse. He instantly said,
"'I stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn!'
The master's pulse stood still, and he stared helplessly. The buzz of study ceased. The
pupils wondered if this foolhardy boy had lost his mind. The master said,
"'You—'
"'You did what?'
"'Stopped to talk with Huckleberry Finn.'
There was no mistaking the words.
"'TOMMAS SOYER, this is the most astounding confession I have ever listened to. No mere
feral will answer for this offence. Take off your jacket.'
The master's arm performed until it was tired, and the stock of switches
notably diminished. Then the order followed,
"'Now, sir, go and sit with the girls, and let this be a warning to you.'
The titter that rippled around the room appeared to bash the boy, but in
reality that result was caused rather more by his worshipful awe of his
unknown idol, and a dread pleasure that lay in his high good fortune. He
sat down upon the end of the pine bench, and the girl hitched herself
away from him with a toss of her head. Nudges and winks and whispers
traversed the room, but Tom sat still with his arms upon the long, low
desk before him, and seemed to study his book. By-and-by attention ceased
from him, and the accustomed school murmur rose upon the dull air once
more. Presently the boy began to steal furtive glances at the girl. She
observed it, made a mouth at him, and gave him the back of her head for
the space of a minute. When she cautiously faced around again, a peach
lay before her. She thrusted away. Tom gently put it back. She thrusted
away again, but with less animosity. Tom patiently returned it to its
place. Then she let it remain. Tom scrawled on his slate.
"'Please take it. I got more.' The girl glanced at the words, but made
no sign. Now the boy began to draw something on the slate, hiding his
work with his left hand. For a time the girl refused to notice, but her
human curiosity presently began to manifest itself by hardly perceptible
signs.
The boy worked on, apparently unconscious. The girl made a sort of
noise.
At last she gave in, and hesitatingly whispered,
"'Let me see it.' Tom uncovered a dismal caricature of a house with two
gable ends to it, and a corkscrew of smoke issuing from the chimney. Then
the girl's interest began to fasten itself upon the work as she forgot
everything else. When it was finished she gazed a moment, then whispered,
"'It's nice. Make a man.' The artist erected a man in the front yard
that resembled a derrick. He could have stepped over the house. But the
girl was not hypercritical. She was satisfied with the monster, and
whispered,
"'It's a beautiful man. Now make me coming along.' Tom drew an hourglass
with a full moon and straw limbs to it, and armed the spreading fingers
with a portentous fan. The girl said, "'It's ever so nice. I wish I could
draw.'
"'It's easy,' whispered Tom. I'll learn you.
"'Oh, will you? When?'
"'At noon. Do you go home to dinner?'
"'I'll stay, if you will.'
"'Good. That's a whack. What's your name?'
"'Becky Thatcher.'
"'What's yours?'
"'Oh, I know. It's Thomas Sawyer.'
"'That's the name they lick me by. I'm Tom when I'm good. You can call
me Tom, will you?'
"'Yes.'
Now Tom began to scrawl something on the slate, hiding the words from
the girl. But she was not backward this time. She begged to see. Tom
said,
"'Oh, it ain't anything.'
"'Yes, it is.'
"'No, it ain't. You don't want to see it.'
"'Yes, I do. Indeed, I do. Please let me. You'll tell.'
"'No, I won't. Deed and deed and double deed, I won't.'
"'You won't tell anybody at all? Ever as long as you live?'
"'No, I won't ever tell anybody. Now let me.'
"'Oh, you don't want to see. Now that you treat me so, I will see.' And
she put her small hand upon his, and the little scuffle ensued. Tom
pretending to resist in earnest, but letting his hand slip by degrees
till these words were revealed.
"'I love you.'
"'Oh, you bad thing!' And she hit his hand a smart wrap, but reddened
and looked pleased nevertheless. Just at this juncture the boy felt a
slow, fateful grip closing on his ear, and a steady lifting impulse. In
that vice he was borne across the house, and deposited in his own seat
under a peppering fire of giggles from the whole school. Then the master
stood over him during a few awful moments, and finally moved away to his
throne without saying a word. But although Tom's ear tingled, his heart
was jubilant. As the school quieted down, Tom made an honest effort to
study, but the turmoil within him was too great. In turn he took his
place in the reading class and made a botch of it, then in the geography
class and turned lakes into mountains, mountains into rivers, and rivers
into continents, till chaos was come again, then in the spelling class
and got turned down by a succession of mere baby words, till he brought
up at the foot and yielded up the pewter metal which he had worn with
ostentation for months.
The harder Tom tried to fasten his mind on his book, the more his ideas wandered. So,
at last, with a sigh and a yawn, he gave it up. It seemed to him that the noon recess
would never come. The air was utterly dead. There was not a breath stirring. It was the
sleepiest of sleepy days. The drowsing murmur of the five-and-twenty studying scholars soothed
the soul like the spell that is in the murmur of bees. Away off in the flaming sunshine,
Cart of Hill lifted its soft green sides through a shimmering veil of heat tinted with a purple
of distance. A few birds floated on lazy wing high in the air. No other living thing was
visible, but some cows, and they were asleep. Tom's heart ached to be free, or else to have
something of interest to do to pass the dreary time. His hand wandered into his pocket, and
his face lit up with a glow of gratitude that was prayer, though he did not know it.
Then furtively the percussion-cap box came out. He released the tick, and put him on
the long flat desk. The creature probably glowed with a gratitude that amounted to prayer,
too, at this moment, but it was premature, for when he started thankfully to travel off,
Tom turned him aside with a pin, and made him take a new direction. Tom's bosom friend
sat next to him, suffering just as Tom had been, and now he was deeply and gratefully
interested in this entertainment in an instant. This bosom friend was Joe Harper. The two
boys were sworn friends all the week, and embattled enemies on Saturdays. Joe took a
pin out of his lapel, and began to assist in exercising the prisoner. The sport grew
in interest momently. Soon Tom said that they were interfering with each other, and neither
getting the fullest benefit of the tick. So he put Joe's slate on the desk, and drew
a line down the middle of it from top to bottom.
"'Now,' said he, "'as long as he is on your side, you can stir him up, and I'll let him
alone. But if you let him get away and get on my side, you're to leave him alone as long
as I can keep him from crossing over. All right, go ahead, start him up.'
The tick escaped from Tom, presently, and crossed the equator. Joe harassed him a while,
and then he got away, and crossed back again. This change of base occurred often. While
one boy was worrying the tick with absorbing interest, the other would look on with interest
as strong. The two heads bowed together over the slate, and the two souls dead to all things
else. At last luck seemed to settle and abide with Joe. The tick tried this, that, and the
other course, and got as excited and as anxious as the boys themselves, but time and again,
just as he would have victory in his very grasp, so to speak, and Tom's fingers would
be twitching to begin, Joe's pin would deftly head him off and keep possession. At last
Tom could stand it no longer. The temptation was too strong, so he reached out and lent
a hand with his pin. Joe was angry in a moment. Said he, "'Tom, you let him alone.'
"'I only just want to stir him up a little, Joe.'
"'No, sir, it ain't fair. You just let him alone.'
"'Blame it, I ain't going to stir him much. Let him alone, I tell you.'
"'Well, I won't. You shall. He's on my side of the line. Look here, Joe Harper, whose
is that tick? I don't care whose tick he is. He's on my side of the line, and you shan't
touch him.'
"'Well, I'll just bet I will, though. He's my tick, and I'll do what I blame please with
him, or die.'
A tremendous whack came down on Tom's shoulders, and its duplicate on Joe's, and for the space
of two minutes the dust continued to fly from the two jackets and the whole school to enjoy
it. The boys had been too absorbed to notice the hush that had stolen upon the school a
while before, when the master came tip-toeing down the room and stood over them. He had
contemplated a good part of the performance before he contributed his bit of variety to
it. When school broke up at noon, Tom flew to Becky Thatcher, and whispered in her ear,
"'Put on your bonnet and let on your going home, and when you get to the corner, give
the rest of them the slip, and turn down through the lane and come back. I'll go the
other way, and come it over them the same way.'
So the one went off with one group of scholars, and the other with another. In a little while
the two met at the bottom of the lane, and when they reached the school they had it all
to themselves. Then they sat together with a slate before them, and Tom gave Becky the
pencil and held her hand in his, guiding it, and so created another surprising house.
When the interest in art began to wane, the two fell to talking. Tom was swimming in bliss.
He said,
"'Do you love rats?'
"'No, I hate them.'
"'Well, I do, too. Live ones. But I mean dead ones, to swing round your head with a
string.'
"'No, I don't care for rats much, anyway. What I like is chewing-gum.'
"'Oh, I should say so. I wish I had some now.'
"'Do you? I've got some. I'll let you chew it a while. But you must give it back to me.
"'That was agreeable.' So they chewed it, turned about, and dangled their legs against
the bench in excess of contentment.
"'Was you ever at a circus?' said Tom.
"'Yes, and my pa's going to take me again some time, if I'm good. I've been to the
circus three or four times, lots of times. Church ain't shucks to a circus. There's
things going on at a circus all the time. I'm going to be a clown in a circus when I
grow up.'
"'Oh, are you? That will be nice. They're so lovely, all spotted up.'
"'Yes, that's so. And they get slathers of money, most a dollar a day,' Ben Rogers
says. Say, Becky, was you ever engaged?'
"'What's that?'
"'Why, engaged to be married.'
"'No.'
"'Would you like to?'
"'I reckon so. I don't know. What is it like?'
"'Like? Why, it ain't like anything. You only just tell a boy you won't ever have anybody
but him, ever, ever, ever, and then you kiss and that's all. Anybody can do it.'
"'Kiss? What do you kiss for?'
"'Why, that, you know, is to—'
"'Well, they always do that.'
"'Everybody?'
"'Why, yes, everybody that's in love with each other. Do you remember what I wrote
on the slate?'
"'Yes.'
"'What was it?'
"'I shan't tell you.'
"'Shall I tell you?'
"'Yes, but some other time.'
"'No, now. No, not now. To-morrow. Oh, no, now. Please, Becky, I'll whisper it. I'll
whisper it ever so easy.'
Becky hesitating, Tom took silence for consent, and passed his arm about her waist and whispered
the tale ever so softly, with his mouth close to her ear, and then he added,
"'Now you whisper it to me. Just the same.'
She resisted for a while, and then said,
"'You turn your face away so you can't see, and then I will. But you mustn't ever tell
anybody, will you, Tom? Now you won't, will you?'
"'No, indeed, indeed, I won't. Now, Becky.'
He turned his face away, and she bent timidly around till her breath stirred his curls and
whispered,
"'I love you.'
Then she sprang away and ran around and around the desks and benches, with Tom after her,
and took refuge in a corner at last, with her little white apron to her face. Tom clasped
her about her neck and pleaded,
"'Now, Becky, it's all done, all over, but the kiss. Don't you be afraid of that. It
ain't anything at all. Please, Becky.'
And he tugged at her apron and the hands. By and by she gave up and let her hands drop.
Her face, all glowing with a struggle, came up and submitted. Tom kissed the red lips
and said,
"'Now, it's all done, Becky. And always after this, you know, you ain't ever to love anybody
but me, and you ain't ever to marry anybody but me. Never, never and for ever, will you?'
"'No, I'll never love anybody but you, Tom, and I'll never marry anybody but you. And
you ain't to ever marry anybody but me either.'
"'Certainly, of course. That's part of it. And always coming to school, or when we're
home, you're to walk with me—when there ain't anybody looking—and you choose me
and I choose you at parties, because that's the way you do when you're engaged. It's so
nice I never heard of it before. Oh, it's ever so gay. Why, me and Amy Lawrence!'
The big eyes told Tom his blunder and he stopped confused.
"'Oh, Tom, then I ain't the first you've ever been engaged to.'
The child began to cry and Tom said,
"'Oh, don't cry, Becky. I don't care for her any more.'
"'Yes, you do, Tom, you know you do.'
Tom tried to put his arm about her neck, but she pushed him away and turned her face to
the wall and went on crying. Tom tried again, with soothing words in his mouth, and was
repulsed again. Then his pride was up, and he strode away and went outside. He stood
about restless and uneasy for a while, glancing at the door every now and then, hoping she
would repent and come to find him, but she did not. Then he began to feel badly and fear
that he was in the wrong. It was a hard struggle with him to make new advances now, but he
nerved himself to it and entered. She was still standing back there in the corner sobbing
with her face to the wall. Tom's heart smote him. He went to her and stood a moment, not
knowing exactly how to proceed. Then he said hesitatingly,
"'Becky, I—I don't care for anybody but you.'
No reply. But sobs.
"'Becky,' pleadingly,
"'Becky, won't you say something?'
More sobs. Tom got out his chiefest jewel, a brass knob from the top of an andiron, and
passed it around her so that she could see it, and said,
"'Please, Becky, won't you take it?'
She struck it to the floor. Then Tom marched out of the house and over the hills and far
away, to return to school no more that day. Presently Becky began to suspect. She ran
to the door. He was not in sight. She flew around to the play yard. He was not there.
Then she called,
"'Tom! Come back, Tom!'
She listened intently, but there was no answer. She had no companions but silence and loneliness.
So she sat down to cry again and upbraid herself, and by this time the scholars began to gather
again, and she had to hide her griefs and still her broken heart, and take up the cross
of a long, dreary, aching afternoon, with none among the strangers about her to exchange
sorrows with.
A PIRATE BOLD TO BE
Tom dodged hither and thither through lanes until he was well out of the track of returning
scholars, and then fell into a moody jog. He crossed a small branch, two or three times,
because of a prevailing juvenile superstition that to cross water baffles pursuit. Half
an hour later he was disappearing behind the Douglas Mansion on the summit of Cardiff
Hill, and the schoolhouse was hardly distinguishable away off in the valley behind him. He entered
a dense wood, picked his pathless way to the centre of it, and sat down on a mossy spot
under a spreading oak. There was not even a zephyr stirring. The dead noonday heat had
even stilled the songs of the birds. Nature lay in a trance that was broken by no sound
but the occasional far-off hammering of a woodpecker, and this seemed to render the
prevailing silence and sense of loneliness the more profound. The boy's soul was steeped
in melancholy. His feelings were in happy accord with his surroundings. He sat long
with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands, meditating. It seemed to him
that life was but a trouble at best, and he more than half envied Jimmy Hodges so lately
released. It must be very peaceful, he thought, to lie and slumber and dream for ever and
ever, with the wind whispering through the trees and caressing the grass and the flowers
over the grave, and nothing to bother and grieve about ever any more. If he only had
a clean Sunday-school record he could be willing to go—and be done with it all. Now
as to this girl, what had he done? Nothing. He had meant the best in the world and been
treated like a dog, like a very dog. She would be sorry some day—maybe when it was too
late—if he could only die temporarily.
But the elastic heart of youth cannot be compressed into one constrained shape long at any time.
Tom presently began to drift insensibly back into the concerns of this life again. What
if he turned his back now and disappeared mysteriously? What if he went away, ever so
far away, into unknown countries beyond the seas, and never came back any more? How would
she feel then? The idea of being a clown recurred to him now, only to fill him with disgust.
For frivolity and jokes and spotted tights were an offence when they intruded themselves
upon a spirit that was exalted into the vague, august realm of the romantic. No, he would
be a soldier, and return after long years all war-worn and illustrious. No, better still,
he would join the Indians, and hunt buffaloes and go on the war-path in the mountain ranges
and the trackless great plains of the far west, and away in the future come back a great
chief, bristling with feathers, hideous with paint, and prance into Sunday school some
drowsy summer morning, with a blood-curling war-whoop, and sear the eyeballs of all his
companions with unappeasable envy. But no, there was something gaudier even than this.
He would be a pirate. That was it. Now his future lay plain before him, and glowing with
unimaginable splendour. How his name would fill the world, and make people shudder!
How gloriously he would go ploughing the dancing seas in his long, low, black-hulled racer,
the Spirit of the Storm, with his grizzly flag flying at the fore! And at the zenith
of his fame, how he would suddenly appear at the old village and stalk into church,
brown and weather-beaten, in his black velvet doublet and trunks, his great jack-boots,
his crimson sash, his belt bristling with horse pistols, his crime-rusted cutlass at
his side, his slouch-hat with waving plumes, his black flag unfurled, with a skull and
crossbones on it, and here, with swelling ecstasy, the whisperings,
"'It's Tom Sawyer, the pirate, the black avenger of the Spanish main!'
Yes, it was settled. His career was determined. He would run away from home and enter upon
it. He would start the very next morning. Therefore he must now begin to get ready.
He would collect his resources together. He went to a rotten log near at hand, and began
to dig under one end of it with his barlow-knife. He soon struck wood that sounded hollow. He
put his hand there, and uttered this incantation impressively,
"'What hasn't come here, come! What's here, stay here!'
Then he scraped away the dirt, and exposed a pine-shingle. He took it up and disclosed
a shapely little treasure-house whose bottom and sides were of shingles. In it lay a marble.
Tom's astonishment was boundless. He scratched his head with perplexed air, and said,
"'Well, that beats anything!'
Then he tossed the marble away, pettishly, and stood cogitating. The truth was that a
had always looked upon as infallible. If you buried a marble with certain necessary incantations
and left it alone a fortnight, and then opened the place with the incantation he had just
used, you would find that all the marbles you had ever lost had gathered themselves
together there, meantime, no matter how widely they had been separated. But now this thing
had actually and unquestionably failed.
Tom's whole structure of faith was shaken to its foundations. He had many a time heard
of this thing succeeding, but never of its failing before. It did not occur to him that
he had tried it several times before, himself, but could never find the hiding-places afterward.
He puzzled over the matter some time, and finally decided that some witch had interfered
and broken the charm. He thought he would satisfy himself on that point, so he searched
around till he found a small sandy spot with a little funnel-shaped depression in it. He
tell me what I want to know. Doodle-bug, doodle-bug, tell me what I want to know.
The sand began to work, and presently a small black bug appeared for a second, and then
darted under again in a fright. He doesn't tell, so it was a witch that done it. I just
noted.
He well knew the futility of trying to contend against witches, so he gave up discouraged.
But it occurred to him that he might as well have the marble he had just thrown away, and
therefore he went and made a patient search for it. But he could not find it. Now he went
back to his treasure-house, and carefully placed himself just as he had been standing
when he tossed the marble away. Then he took another marble from his pocket, and tossed
it in the same way, saying,
"'Brother, go find your brother!' He watched where it stopped, and went there and looked.
But it must have fallen short or gone too far, so he tried twice more. The last repetition
was successful. The two marbles lay within a foot of each other.
Just here the blast of a toy tin trumpet came faintly down the green aisles of the forest.
Tom flung off his jacket and trousers, turned a suspender into a belt, raked away some brush
behind the rotten log, disclosing a rude bow and arrow, a lath sword, and a tin trumpet,
and in a moment had seized these things and bounded away bare-legged with fluttering shirt.
He presently halted under a great elm, blew an answering blast, and then began to tip-toe
and look warily out, this way and that. He said cautiously to an imaginary company,
"'Hold, my merry men! Keep hid till I blow!' Now appeared Joe Harper, as airily clad and
elaborately armed as Tom. Tom called,
"'Hold! Who comes into Sherwood Forest without my pass? Guy of Gisborne wants no man's pass!
Who art thou that—that dares to hold such language?' said Tom, prompting, for they talked
by the book from memory. "'Who art thou that dares to hold such language?'
"'I, indeed. I am Robin Hood, as thy Cate of Carcass soon shall know.'
"'Then art thou indeed that famous outlaw? Right gladly will I dispute with thee the
passes of the Merry Wood. Have at thee!' They took their lath swords, dumped their other
traps on the ground, and struck a fencing attitude, foot to foot, and began a grave
careful combat, two up and two down. Presently Tom said,
"'Now if you've got the hang, go it lively!' So they went it lively, panting and perspiring
with the work. By and by Tom shouted,
"'Fall! Fall! Why don't you fall?'
"'I shan't. Why don't you fall yourself? You're getting the worst of it.'
"'Why, that ain't anything. I can't fall. That ain't the way it is in the book. The
book says, then, with one black-handed stroke, he slew poor Guy of Gisborne. You're to turn
round and let me hit you on the back.' There was no getting around the authorities, so
Joe turned, received the whack, and fell.
"'Now,' said Joe, getting up, "'you got to let me kill you. That's fair.'
"'Why, I can't do that. It ain't in the book.'
"'Well, it's blamed mean, that's all.'
"'Well, say, Joe, you can be Friar Tuck, or Much, the miller's son, and land me with
the quarter-staff, or I'll be the Sheriff of Nottingham, and you be Robin Hood a little
while and kill me.'
This was satisfactory, and so these adventures were carried out. Then Tom became Robin Hood
again, and was allowed by the treacherous nun to bleed his strength away through his
neglected wound. And at last Joe, representing a whole tribe of weeping outlaws, dragged
him sadly forth, gave his bow into his feeble hands, and Tom said,
"'Where this arrow falls, there bury poor Robin Hood under the Greenwood tree.' Then
he shot the arrow and fell back, and would have died, but he lit on a nuttle, and sprang
up too gaily for a corpse. The boys dressed themselves, hid their accouterments, and went
off grieving that there were no outlaws any more, and wondering what modern civilization
could claim to have done to compensate for their loss. They said they would rather be
outlaws a year in Sherwood Forest than President of the United States forever.
IX. TRAGEDY IN THE GRAVE-YARD.
At half-past nine that night Tom and Sid were sent to bed as usual. They said their prayers,
and Sid was soon asleep. Tom lay awake and waited in restless impatience. When it seemed
to him that it must be nearly daylight he heard the clock strike ten. This was despair.
He would have tossed and fidgeted as his nerves demanded, but he was afraid he might wake
Sid, so he lay still and stared up into the dark. Everything was dismally still. By and
of the stillness little scarcely perceptible noises began to emphasize themselves. The ticking
of the clock began to bring itself into notice. Old beams began to crack mysteriously. The
stairs creaked faintly. Evidently spirits were abroad. A measured, muffled snore issued
from Aunt Polly's chamber. And now the tiresome chirping of a cricket that no human ingenuity
could locate began. Next the ghastly ticking of a death watch in the wall at the bed's
head made Tom shudder. It meant that somebody's days were numbered. Then the howl of a far-off
dog rose on the night air and was answered by a fainter howl from a remoter distance.
Tom was in an agony. At last he was satisfied the time had ceased and eternity begun. He
clock chimed eleven, but he did not hear it. And then there came, mingling with his half-formed
dreams, a most melancholy catterwalling. The raising of a neighbouring window disturbed
him. A cry of, "'Scat, you devil!' and the crash of an empty bottle against the back
of his aunt's woodshed brought him wide awake, and a single minute later he was dressed and
out of the window and creeping along the roof of the L on all fours. He meowed with caution
once or twice as he went, then jumped to the roof of the woodshed and thence to the ground.
Huckleberry Finn was there, with his dead cat. The boys moved off and disappeared in
the gloom. At the end of half an hour they were wading through the tall grass of the
graveyard. It was a graveyard of the old-fashioned Western kind. It was on a hill, about a mile
and a half from the village. It had a crazy bored fence around it, which leaned inward
in places, and outward the rest of the time, but stood upright nowhere. Grass and weeds
grew rank over the whole cemetery. All the old graves were sunken in, there was not a
tombstone on the place. Round-topped, worm-eaten boards staggered over the graves, leaning
for support, and finding none. Sacred to the memory of, so-and-so had been painted
on them once, but it could no longer have been read on the most of them now, even if
there had been light. A faint wind moaned through the trees, and Tom feared it might
be the spirits of the dead complaining of being disturbed. The boys talked little, and
only under their breath, for the time and the place and the pervading solemnity and
silence oppressed their spirits. They found the sharp new heap they were seeking, and
ensconced themselves within the protection of three great elms that grew in a bunch within
a few feet of the grave. Then they waited in silence for what seemed a long time. The
mooting of a distant owl was all the sound that troubled the dead's stillness. Tom's
reflections grew oppressive. He must force some talk, so he said in a whisper,
"'Huckie, do you believe the dead people like it for us to be here?' Huckleberry whispered,
"'I wished I'd knowed. It's awful solemn-like, ain't it?'
"'I bet it is.'
There was a considerable pause while the boys canvassed this matter inwardly. Then Tom whispered,
"'Say, Huckie, do you reckon Hoss Williams hears us talkin'?'
"'Oh, course he does—least his spirit does.'
Tom after a pause, "'I wish I'd said Mr. Williams, but I never meant any harm. Everybody called
him Hoss.'
"'A body can't be too particular how they talk about these here dead people, Tom.'
This was a damper, and conversation died again. Presently Tom seized his comrade's arm and
"'Shh! What is it, Tom?' And the two clung together with beating hearts.
"'Shh! There it is again. Didn't you hear it? Ay, there, now you hear it. Lord, Tom, they're
comin'—they're comin' sure. What do we do?'
"'I don't know. Think they'll see us?'
"'Oh, Tom, they can see in the dark—same as cats. I wished I hadn't come.'
"'Oh, don't be feared. I don't believe they'll bother us. We ain't doin' any harm. If we
keep perfectly still, maybe they won't notice us at all.'
"'I'll try to, Tom, but, Lord, I'm all a shiver. Listen!'
The boys bent their heads together and scarcely breathed. A muffled sound of voices floated
up from the far end of the graveyard.
"'Look! See! There!' whispered Tom.
"'What is it?'
"'It's devil fire! Oh, Tom, this is awful!'
Some vague figures approached through the gloom, swinging an old-fashioned tin lantern
that freckled the ground with innumerable little spangles of light. Presently Huckleberry
whispered with a shudder.
"'It's the devils, sure enough—three of them. Lordy, Tom, we're goners. Can you pray?'
"'I'll try, but don't you be feared. They ain't going to hurt us. Now I lay me down
to sleep—I—'
"'Shh! What is it, Huck?'
"'They're humans. One of them is, anyway. One of them's old muff Potter's voice.'
"'No, taint so, is it? I bet I know it. Don't you stir nor budge. He ain't got
taint sharp enough to notice us. Drunk the same as usual, likely. Blamed old rip.'
"'All right, I'll keep still. Now they're stuck. Can't find it. Here they come again.
Now they're hot. Cold again. Hot again. Red hot. They're pointed right this time. Say,
Huck, I know another of them voices. It's Injun Joe.'
"'That's so, that murdering half-breed. I'd rather they was devils a-durn sight. What
can they be up to?'
The whisper died wholly out now, for the three men had reached the grave and stood within
a few feet of the boy's hiding-place.
"'Here it is,' said the third voice, and the owner of it held up the lantern and revealed
the face of young Dr. Robinson. Potter and Injun Joe were carrying a hand-barrow with
a rope and a couple of shovels on it. They cast down their load and began to open the
grave. The doctor put the lantern at the head of the grave, and came and sat with his back
against one of the elm-trees. He was so close the boys could have touched him.
"'Hurry, men,' he said in a low voice, "'the moon might come out at any moment.'
They growled a response and went on digging. For some time there was no noise but the grating
sound of the spades discharging their freight of mold and gravel. It was very monotonous.
Finally a spade struck upon the coffin with a dull woody accent, and within another minute
or two the men had hoisted it out of the ground. They pried off the lid with their
shovels, got out the body, and dumped it rudely on the ground. The moon drifted from behind
the clouds and exposed the pallid face. The barrow was got ready, and the corpse placed
on it, covered with a blanket, and bound to its place with a rope. Potter took out a large
spring-knife and cut off the dangling end of the rope, and then said,
"'Now the cussed thing's ready, Sawbones, and you'll just out with another five, or
here she stays.'
"'That's the talk,' said Injun Joe.
"'Look here, what does this mean?' said the doctor.
"'You required your pay in advance, and I've paid you.'
"'Yes, and you've done more than that,' said Injun Joe, approaching the doctor who
was now standing. "'Five years ago you drove me away from your father's kitchen one night,
when I come to ask for something to eat, and you said I weren't there for any good, and
when I swore I'd get even with you, if it took a hundred years, your father had me jailed
for a vagrant. Did you think I'd forget?'
"'The Injun blood ain't in me for nothing. And now I've got you, and you got to settle,
you know.'
He was threatening the doctor, with his fist in his face by this time. The doctor struck
out suddenly and stretched the ruffian on the ground. Potter dropped his knife and exclaimed,
"'Here, now, don't you hit my pard!' and the next moment he was grappled with the doctor,
and the two were struggling with might and main, trampling the grass and tearing the
ground with their heels. Injun Joe sprang to his feet, his eyes flaming with passion,
snatched up Potter's knife, and went creeping, cat-like and snooping, round and round about
the combatants, seeking an opportunity. All at once the doctor flung himself free, seized
the heavy headboard of William's grave, and felled Potter to the earth with it, and in
the same instance the half-breed saw his chance and drove the knife to the hilt in the young
man's breast. He reeled and fell partly upon Potter, flooding him with his blood, and in
the same moment the clouds blotted out the dreadful spectacle, and the two frightened
boys went speeding away in the dark. Presently, when the moon emerged again, Injun Joe was
standing over the two forms, contemplating them. The doctor murmured inarticulately,
gave a long gasp or two, and was still. The half-breed muttered,
"'That score is settled, damn you!' Then he robbed the body, after which he put the
fatal knife in Potter's open right hand, and sat down on the dismantled coffin. Three,
four, five minutes passed, and then Potter began to stir and moan. His hand closed upon
the knife. He raised it, glanced at it, and let it fall with a shudder. Then he sat up
pushing the body from him, and gazed at it, and then around him, confusedly, his eyes
met Joe's.
"'Lord, how is this, Joe?' he said.
"'It's a dirty business,' said Joe, without moving.
"'What did you do it for?'
"'I—I never done it. Look here, that kind of talk won't wash.'
Potter trembled and grew white.
"'I thought I'd got sober. I've no business to drink to-night. But it's in my head yet,
worse than when we started here. I'm all in a muddle, can't recollect anything of it hardly.
Tell me, Joe—honest now, old feller—did I do it? Joe, I never meant to, upon my soul
and honour, I never meant to, Joe. Tell me how it was, Joe. Oh, it's awful! And him so
young and promising. Why, you two were scuffling, and he fetched you one with a headboard, and
you fell flat, and then up you come, all reeling and staggering-like, and snatched the knife
and jammed it into him, just as he fetched you another awful clip, and here you've laid,
as dead as a wedge till now. Oh, I didn't know what I was doing. I wish I may die this
minute if I did. It was all on account of the whisky—and the excitement, I reckon.
I never used a weepin' in my life before, Joe. I've fought, but never with weepins.
They'll all say that. Joe, don't tell. Say you won't tell, Joe. That's a good feller.
I always liked you, Joe, and stood up for you, too. Don't you remember? You won't tell,
will you, Joe?" And the poor creature dropped on his knees before the stolid murderer and
clasped his appealing hands.
No. You've always been fair and square with me, Muff Potter, and I won't go back on you.
There, now, that's as fair as a man can say.
Oh, Joe, you're an angel. I'll bless you for this, the longest day I live—and Potter
began to cry.
Come, now, that's enough of that. This ain't any time for blubbering. You be off yonderway,
and I'll go this. Move now, and don't leave any tracks behind you.
Potter started on a trot that quickly increased to a run. The half-breed stood looking after
him, and he muttered—
If he's as much stunned with the lick and fuddled with the rum as he had the look of
being, he won't think of the knife, till he's gone so far he'll be afraid to come back after
it to such a place by himself, chicken-heart. Two or three minutes later the murdered man,
the blanketed corpse, the lidless coffin, and the open grave rendered no inspection
but the moon's. The stillness was complete again, too.
DIRE PROPHECY OF THE HOWLING DOG
The two boys flew on and on toward the village, speechless with horror. They glanced backwards
over their shoulders from time to time, apprehensively, as if they feared they might be followed.
Every stump that started up in their path seemed a man and an enemy, and made them catch
their breath. And as they sped by some outlying cottages that lay near the village, the barking
of the aroused watch-dogs seemed to give wings to their feet.
"'If we can only get to the old tannery before we break down,' whispered Tom in short catches
between breaths, "'I can't stand it much longer.' Huckleberry's hard pantings were his only
reply, and the boys fixed their eyes on the goal of their hopes and bent to their work
to win it. They gained steadily on it, and at last, breast to breast, they burst through
the open door and fell grateful and exhausted in the sheltering shadows beyond. By and by
their pulses slowed down, and Tom whispered, "'Huckleberry, what do you reckon'll come
of this?'
"'If Dr. Robinson dies, I reckon hangin''ll come of it.'
"'Do you, though?'
"'Why, I know it, Tom.'
Tom thought awhile, and he said, "'Who'll tell? We? What are you talkin' about? Suppose
something happened and Injun Joe didn't hang. Why, he'd kill us some time or other, just
as dead sure as we're layin' here. That's just what I was thinkin' to myself, Huck.'
"'If anybody tells, let Muff Potter do it. If he's fool enough, he's generally drunk
enough.'
Tom said nothing, went on thinking. Presently he whispered,
"'Huck, Muff Potter don't know it. How can he tell?'
"'What's the reason he don't know it?'
"'Because he'd just got that whack when Injun Joe done it. Do you reckon he could see anything?
Do you reckon he knowed anything?'
"'By hokey, that's so, Tom. And besides, look here, maybe that whack done for him.
"'No, taint likely, Tom. He had liquor in him. I could see that. And besides, he always
has. Well, when paps full, he might take and belt him over the head with a church and you
couldn't faze him. He says so his own self. So it's the same with Muff Potter, of course.
But if a man was dead sober, I reckon maybe that whack might fetch him. I don't know.'
After another reflective silence Tom said,
"'Hucky, you sure you can keep Mum?'
"'Tom, we got to keep Mum. You know that. That Injun devil wouldn't make any more of drowning
us than a couple of cats, if we was to squeak about this and they didn't hang him. Now look
here, Tom, let's take and swear to one another. That's what we got to do—swear to keep Mum.'
"'I'm agreed. It's the best thing. Would you just hold hands and swear that we—'
"'Oh, no, that wouldn't do for this. That's good enough for little rubbishy common things,
especially with gals, because they go back on you anyway, and blab if they get in a huff.
But there ought to be writing about a big thing like this—and blood.'
Tom's whole being applauded this idea. It was deep and dark and awful. The hour, the
circumstances, the surroundings were in keeping with it. He picked up a clean pine shingle
that lay in the moonlight, took a little fragment of red keel out of his pocket, got the moon
on his work, and painfully scrawled these lines, emphasizing each slow downstroke by
clamping his tongue between his teeth and letting up the pressure on the upstrokes.
See next page.
Huckleberry was filled with admiration of Tom's facility in writing and the sublimity
of his language. He at once took a pin from his lapel and was going to prick his flesh,
but Tom said,
"'Hold on! Don't do that! A pin's brass. It might have vertigrease on it.'
What's vertigrease? It's pison. That's what it is. You just swallow some of it once—you'll
see."
So Tom unwound a thread from one of his needles, and each boy pricked the ball of his thumb
and squeezed out a drop of blood.
Huck Finn and Tom Sawyer swears they will keep mum about this, and they wish they may
drop down dead in their tracks if they ever tell and rot.
In time, after many squeezes, Tom managed to sign his initials using the ball of his
little finger for a pen. Then he showed Huckleberry how to make an H and an F, and the oath was
complete. They buried the shingle close to the wall, with some dismal ceremonies and
incantations, and the fetters that bound their tongues were considered to be locked, and
the key thrown away. A figure crept stealthily through a break in the other end of the ruined
building now, but they did not notice it.
Tom whispered to Huckleberry,
"'Does this keep us from ever telling—always?'
"'Of course it does. It don't make any difference. What happens? We gotta keep mum. We drop down
dead. Don't you know that?'
"'Yes, I reckon that's so."
They continued to whisper for some little time. Presently a dog set up a long, lugubrious
howl just outside, within ten feet of them. The boys clasped each other suddenly in an
agony of fright.
"'Which of us does he mean?' gasped Huckleberry.
"'I don't know. Peep through the crack, quick.'
"'No, you, Tom.'
"'I can't. I can't do it, Huck.'
"'Please, Tom. There it is again.'
"'Oh, Lordy, I'm thankful,' whispered Tom. I know his voice. It's Bull Harbison."
Note. If Mr. Harbison had owned a slave named Bull, Tom would have spoken of him as Harbison's
Bull. But a son, or a dog, of that name was Bull Harbison.
"'Oh, that's good. I tell you, Tom, I was scared to death, and I'd have bet anything
it was a stray dog.' The dog howled again. The boys' hearts sank once more.
"'Oh, my! That ain't no Bull Harbison!' whispered Huckleberry.
"'Do, Tom!'
Tom, quicking with fear, yielded and put his eye to the crack. His whisper was hardly
audible when he said,
"'Oh, Huck, it's a stray dog.'
"'Quick, Tom, quick. Who does he mean?'
"'Huck, he must mean us both. We're right together.'
"'Oh, Tom, I reckon we're goners. I reckon there ain't no mistake about where I'll go
to. I've been so wicked.'
"'Dag-fetch it! This comes of playing hooky and doing everything a feller's told not to
do. I might have been good like Sid if I'd a tried, but no, I wouldn't, of course. But
if ever I get off of this time, I lay I'll just waller in Sunday schools.' And Tom began
to snuffle a little.
"'You bad?'
And Huckleberry began to snuffle, too.
"'Con sound it, Tom Sawyer. You're just old pie, long side of what I am. Oh, lordy, lordy,
lordy! I wished I'd only had half your chance.'
Tom choked off and whispered,
"'Look, Hucky, look! He's got his back to us.'
Hucky looked with joy in his heart.
"'Well, he has, by jingos. Did he before?'
"'Yes, he did. But I—like a fool, I never thought. Oh, this is bully, you know. Now,
who can he mean?'
The howling stopped, and Tom pricked up his ears.
"'Shh! What's that?' he whispered.
"'Sounds like—like hogs grunting. No, it's somebody snoring, Tom.'
"'That is it. Whereabouts is it, Huck? I believe it's down at Tother End. Sounds so, anyway.
Pap used to sleep there sometimes, long with the hogs. But laws bless you, he just lifts
things when he snores. Besides, I reckon he ain't ever coming back to this town any more.'
The spirit of adventure rose in the boy's soul once more.
"'Hucky, do you dare to go if I lead? I don't like too much. Tom's supposed it's Injun Joe.'
Tom quailed. But presently the temptation rose up strong again, and the boys agreed to try,
with the understanding that they would take to their heels if the snoring stopped. So
they went tip-toeing, stealthily down, the one behind the other. When they had got to
within five steps of the snore, Tom stepped on a stick, and it broke with a sharp snap.
The man moaned, writhed little, and his face came into the moonlight. It was Muff Potter.
The boys' hearts had stood still in their hopes, too, when the man moved, but their
fears passed away now. They tip-toed out, through the broken weather-boarding, and stopped
a little distance to exchange a parting word. That long, lugubrious howl rose on the nightmare
again. They turned and saw the strange dog standing within a few feet of where Potter
was lying, and facing Potter, with his nose pointing heavenward.
"'Oh, Jiminy, it's him!' exclaimed both boys, in a breath.
"'Say, Tom, they say a stray dog come howling round Johnny Miller's house about midnight
as much as two weeks ago, and a whipper-wheel come in and lit on a banister and sung the
very same evening, and there ain't anybody dead there yet.'
"'Well, I know that, and suppose there ain't. Didn't Gracie Miller fall in the kitchen
and burn herself terrible the very next Saturday?'
"'Yes, but she ain't dead. And what's more, she's getting better, too.'
"'All right, well, you wait and see. She's a goner just as dead sure as Muff Potter's
a goner. That's what the niggers say, and they know all about these kind of things,
Huck.'
Then they separated, cogitating.
When Tom crept in at his bedroom window, the night was almost spent. He undressed with
excessive caution, and fell asleep congratulating himself that nobody knew of his escapade.
He was not aware that the gently snoring Sid was awake, and had been so for an hour. When
Tom awoke, Sid was dressed and gone. There was a late look in the light, a late sense
in the atmosphere. He was startled. Why had he not been called? Persecuted till he was
up as usual. The thought filled him with boatings. Within five minutes he was dressed and downstairs,
feeling sore and drowsy. The family were still at table, but they had finished breakfast.
There was no voice of rebuke, but there were averted eyes. There was a silence and an air
of solemnity that struck a chill to the culprit's heart. He sat down and tried to seem gay,
but it was uphill work. It roused no smile, no response, and he lapsed into silence and
let his heart sink down to the depths.
After breakfast his aunt took him aside, and Tom was almost brightened in the hope that
he was going to be flogged, but it was not so. His aunt wept over him and asked him how
he could go and break her old heart so, and finally told him to go on and ruin himself
and bring her grey hairs with sorrow to the grave, for it was no use for her to try any
more. This was worse than a thousand whippings, and Tom's heart was soarer now than his body.
He cried, he pleaded for forgiveness, promised to reform over and over again, and then received
his dismissal, feeling that he had won but an imperfect forgiveness and established but
confidence. He left the presence too miserable to even feel revengeful towards Sid, and so
the latter's prompt retreat through the back gateway was unnecessary. He moped to school
gloomy and sad, and took his flogging, along with Joe Harper, for playing hooky the day
before, with the air of one whose heart was busy with heavier woes and wholly dead to
trifles. Then he betook himself to his seat, rested his elbows on his desk and his jaws
in his hands, and stared at the wall with a stony stare of suffering that has reached
the limit and can no further go. His elbow was pressing against some hard substance.
After a long time he slowly and sadly changed his position and took up this object with
a sigh. It was in a paper. He unrolled it. A long, lingering, colossal sigh followed
and his heart broke. It was his brass and iron knob. This final feather broke the camel's
back.
XI.
CONSCIENCE RACKS TOM.
Close upon the hour of noon the whole village was suddenly electrified with the ghastly
news. No need of the as yet undreamed of telegraph. The tale flew from man to man, from group
to group, from house to house, with little less than telegraphic speed. Of course, the
schoolmaster gave holiday for that afternoon. The town would have thought strangely of him
if he had not. A gory knife had been found close to the murdered man, and it had been
recognized by somebody as belonging to Muff Potter. So the story ran. And it was said
that a belated citizen had come upon Potter washing himself in the branch, about one or
two o'clock in the morning, and that Potter had at once sneaked off. Suspicious circumstances,
especially the washing, which was not a habit with Potter. It was also said that the town
had been ransacked for this murderer—the public are not slow in the matter of sifting
evidence and arriving at a verdict—but that he could not be found. Horsemen had departed
all the roads in every direction, and the sheriff was confident that he would be captured
before night. All the town was drifting toward the graveyard. Tom's heartbreak vanished,
and he joined the procession, not because he would not a thousand times rather go anywhere
else, but because an awful unaccountable fascination drew him on. Arrived at the dreadful place,
he wormed his small body through the crowd and saw the dismal spectacle. It seemed to
him an age since he was there before. Somebody pinched his arm. He turned, and his eyes met
huckleberries. Then both looked elsewhere at once, and wondered if anybody had noticed
anything in their mutual glance. But everybody was talking, and intent upon the grisly spectacle
before them.
"'Poor fellow! Poor young fellow! This ought to be a lesson to grave robbers. Muff Potter
will hang for this if they catch him.' This was the drift of remark, and the minister
said, "'It was a judgment. His hand is here.'"
Now Tom shivered from head to heel, for his eye fell upon the stolid face of Injun Joe.
At this moment the crowd began to sway and struggle, and voices shouted,
"'It's him! It's him! He's coming himself! Who? Who?" from twenty voices.
"'Muff Potter!'
"'Hullo! He's stopped. Look out! He's turning. Don't let him get away!' People in the branches
of the trees over Tom's head said he wasn't trying to get away. He only looked doubtful
and perplexed.
"'Infernal impudence!' said a bystander. Wanted to come and take a quiet look at his
work. I reckon. Didn't expect any company.' The crowd fell apart now, and the sheriff
came through, ostentatiously leading Potter by the arm. The poor fellow's face was haggard,
and his eyes showed the fear that was upon him. When he stood before the murdered man
he shook as with a palsy, and he put his face in his hands and burst into tears.
"'I didn't do it, friends!' he sobbed. "'Pon my word! An honour! I never done it!'
"'Whose accused you?' shouted a voice. This shot seemed to carry home. Potter lifted his
face and looked around him with a pathetic hopelessness in his eyes. He saw Injun Joe
and exclaimed,
"'Oh, Injun Joe, you promised me you'd never—'
"'Is that your knife?' And it was thrust before him by the sheriff. Potter would have
fallen if they had caught him, and eased him to the ground. Then he said,
"'Something's told me to—if I didn't come back and get—' he shuddered, and then
waved his nerveless hand with a vanquished gesture, and said,
"'Tell him, Joe, tell him! It ain't any use any more!'
Then Huckleberry and Tom stood dumb and staring, and heard the stony-hearted liar reel off
his serene statement, they expecting every moment that the clear sky would deliver God's
lightnings upon his head, and wondering to see how long the stroke was delayed. And when
he had finished, and still stood alive and whole, their wavering impulse to break their
oath and save the poor betrayed prisoner's life faded and vanished away, for plainly
this miscreant had sold himself to Satan, and it would be fatal to meddle with the property
of such a power as that.
"'Why didn't you leave? What did you want to come here for?' somebody said.
"'I couldn't help it, I couldn't help it!' Potter moaned.
"'I wanted to run away, but I couldn't seem to come anywhere but here.' And he fell to
sobbing again.
Injun Joe repeated his statement just as calmly a few minutes afterwards on the inquest, under
oath, and the boys, seeing that the lightnings were still withheld, were confirmed in their
belief that Joe had sold himself to the devil. He was now become to them the most balefully
interesting object they had ever looked upon, and they could not take their fascinated eyes
from his face. They inwardly resolved to watch him, nights, when opportunity should offer,
in the hope of getting a glimpse of his dread master. Injun Joe helped to raise the body
of the murdered man and put it in a wagon for removal, and it was whispered through
the shuddering crowd that the wound bled a little. The boys thought that this happy
circumstance would turn suspicion in the right direction, but they were disappointed, for
more than one villager remarked,
"'It was within three feet of Muff Potter when he'd done it!'
Tom's fearful secret and gnawing conscience disturbed his sleep for as much as a week
after this, and at breakfast one morning Sid said,
"'Tom, you pitch around and talk in your sleep so much that you keep me awake half the time!'
Tom blanched and dropped his eyes.
"'It's a bad sign,' said Aunt Polly gravely. "'What you got on your mind, Tom?'
"'Nothing. Nothing to know of.'
But the boy's hand shook so that he spilled his coffee.
"'And you do talk such stuff,' said Sid. "'Last night you said, It's blood, It's blood,
that's what it is. You said that over and over, and you said, Don't torment me so. I'll
tell.'
"'Tell what? What is it you'll tell?'
Everything was swimming before, Tom. There's no telling what might have happened now, but
luckily the concern passed out of Aunt Polly's face, and she came to Tom's relief without
knowing it. She said,
"'Sure. It's that dreadful murder. I dream about it most every night myself. Sometimes
I dream it's me that done it.'
Mary said she had been affected much the same way. Sid seemed satisfied. Tom got out of
the presence as quick as he plausibly could, and after that he complained of a toothache
for a week, and tied up his jaws every night. He never knew that Sid lay nightly watching,
and frequently slipped the bandage free, and then leaned on his elbow, listening a good
while at a time, and afterwards slipped the bandage back to its place again. Tom's distress
of mind wore off gradually, and the toothache grew irksome and was discarded. If Sid really
managed to make anything out of Tom's disjointed mutterings, he kept it to himself. It seemed
to Tom that his schoolmates never would get done holding inquests on dead cats, and thus
keeping his trouble present to his mind. Sid noticed that Tom never was coroner at one
of these inquiries, though it had been his habit to take the lead in all new enterprises.
He noticed, too, that Tom never acted as a witness, and that was strange, and Sid did
not overlook the fact that Tom even showed a marked aversion to these inquests, and always
avoided them when he could.
Sid marveled, but said nothing. However, even inquests went out of vogue at last, and ceased
to torture Tom's conscience. Every day or two, during this time of sorrow, Tom watched
his opportunity, and went to the little grated jail window, and smuggled such small comforts
through to the murderer, as he could get hold of. The jail was a trifling little brick den
that stood in a marsh at the edge of the village, and no guards were afforded for it, indeed
it was seldom occupied. These offerings greatly helped to ease Tom's conscience. The villagers
had a strong desire to tar and feather Injun Joe and ride him on a rail for body-snatching,
but so formidable was his character that nobody could be found who was willing to take the
lead in the matter, so it was dropped. He had been careful to begin both of his inquest
the fight, without confessing the grave robbery that preceded it. Therefore it was deemed
wisest not to try the case in the courts at present.
One of the reasons why Tom's mind had drifted away from its secret troubles was that it
had found a new and weighty matter to interest itself about. Becky Thatcher had stopped coming
to school. Tom had struggled with his pride a few days, and tried to whistle her down
the wind, but failed. He began to find himself hanging around her father's house nights,
and feeling very miserable.
She was ill. What if she should die? There was distraction in the thought. He no longer
took an interest in war, nor even in piracy. The charm of life was gone. There was nothing
but dreariness left. He put his hoop away, and his bat. There was no joy in them anymore.
His aunt was concerned. She began to try all manner of remedies on him. She was one of
those people who are infatuated with patent medicines, and all newfangled methods of producing
health or mending it. She was an inveterate experimenter in these things. When something
fresh in this line came out, she was in a fever, right away, to try it. Not on herself,
for she was never ailing, but on anybody else that came handy. She was a subscriber for
all the health periodicals and phenomenological frauds, and the solemn ignorance they were
inflated with was breath to her nostrils. All the rot they contained about ventilation
and how to go to bed, and how to get up, and what to eat, and what to drink, and how much
to take, and what frame of mind to keep oneself in, and what sort of clothing to wear, was
all gospel to her, and she never observed that her health journals of the current month
customarily upset everything they had recommended the month before. She was as simple-hearted
and honest as the day was long, and so she was an easy victim. She gathered together
her quack periodicals and her quack medicines, and thus armed with death went about on her
pale horse, metaphorically speaking, with the hell following after. But she never suspected
that she was not an angel of healing and the balm of Gilead in disguise to the suffering
neighbors. The water treatment was new, now, and Tom's low condition was a windfall to
her. She had him out at daylight every morning, stood him up in the woodshed, and drowned
him with a deluge of cold water. Then she scrubbed him down with a towel like a file,
and so brought him to. Then she rolled him up in a wet sheet and put him away under blankets
till she sweated his soul clean, and the yellow stains of it came through his pores, as Tom
said.
Yet notwithstanding all this, the boy grew more and more melancholy and pale and dejected.
She added hot baths, sitz baths, shower baths, and plunges. The boy remained as dismal as
She calculated his capacity as she would a jugs, and filled him up every day with quack
cure-alls. Tom had become indifferent to persecution by this time. This phase filled the old lady's
heart with consternation. This indifference must be broken up at any cost. Now she heard
of painkiller for the first time. She ordered a lot at once. She tasted it and was filled
with gratitude. It was simply fire in a liquid form. She dropped the water treatment and
everything else, and pinned her faith to painkiller. She gave Tom a teaspoonful and watched with
the deepest anxiety for the result. Her troubles were instantly at rest, her soul at peace
again. For the indifference was broken up. The boy could not have shown a wilder, heartier
if she had built a fire under him. Tom felt that it was time to wake up. This sort of
life might be romantic enough in his blighted condition, but it was getting to have too
little sentiment and too much distracting variety about it. So he thought over various
plans for relief, and finally hit upon that of professing to be fond of painkiller. He
asked for it so often that he became a nuisance, and his aunt ended by telling him to help
himself and quit bothering her. If it had been Sid, she would have had no misgivings
to alloy her delight, but since it was Tom she watched the bottle clandestinely. She
found that the medicine did really diminish, but it did not occur to her that the boy was
mending the health of a crack in the sitting-room floor with it.
One day Tom was in the act of dosing the crack when his aunt's yellow cat came along purring,
eyeing the teaspoon avariciously, and begging for a taste. Tom said,
"'Don't ask for it unless you want it, Peter.' But Peter signified that he did want it.
"'You'd better make sure.' Peter was sure. "'Now you've asked for it, and I'll give
it to you, because there ain't anything mean about me. But if you find you don't like it,
you mustn't blame anybody but your own self.'
Peter was agreeable, so Tom pried his mouth open and poured down the painkiller. Peter
sprang a couple of yards in the air and then delivered a war-whoop and set off round and
round the room, banging against furniture, upsetting flower-pots, and making general
havoc. Next he rose on his hind feet and pranced around in a frenzy of enjoyment, with his
head over his shoulder and his voice proclaiming his unappeasable happiness. Then he went tearing
around the house again, spreading chaos and destruction in his path. Aunt Polly entered
in time to see him throw a few double summer sets, deliver a final mighty hurrah, and sail
through the open window, carrying the rest of the flower-pots with him. The old lady
stood petrified with astonishment, peering over her glasses. Tom lay on the floor, expiring
with laughter.
"'Tom, what on earth ails that cat?'
"'I don't know, aunt,' gasped the boy.
"'Why, I never see anything like it. What did make him act so?'
"'Deed I don't know, Aunt Polly. Cats always act so when they're having a good time.'
"'They do, do they?' There was something in the tone that made Tom apprehensive.
"'Yesem! That is, I believe they do.'
"'You do? Yesem!'
The old lady was bending down, Tom watching, with interest emphasized by anxiety. Too late
he divined her drift. The handle of the tell-tale teaspoon was visible under the bed valance.
Aunt Polly took it, held it up. Tom winced, and dropped his eyes. Aunt Polly raised him
by the usual handle—his ear—and cracked his head soundly with her thimble.
"'Now, sir, what did you want to treat that poor dumb beast so for?'
"'I done it out of pity for him, because he hadn't any aunt.'
"'Hadn't any aunt, you numbskull! What has that got to do with it?'
"'Heaps! Because if he'd a had one, she'd a burnt him out herself. She'd a roasted
his bowels out of him, without any more feeling than if he was a human.'
Aunt Polly felt a sudden pang of remorse. This was putting the thing in a new light.
What was cruelty to a cat might be cruelty to a boy, too.' She began to soften. She felt
sorry. Her eyes watered a little, and she put her hand on Tom's head and said gently,
"'I was meaning for the best, Tom, and Tom, it did do you good.' Tom looked up in her
face with just a perceptible twinkle peeping through his gravity.
"'I know you was meaning for the best, auntie, and so was I with Peter. It done him good,
too. I never seen him get around so since. Oh, go along with you, Tom, before you aggravate
me again, and you try and see if you can't be a good boy for once, and you needn't take
any more medicine.'
Tom reached school ahead of time. It was noticed that this strange thing had been occurring
every day laterly. And now, as usual of late, he hung about the gate of the schoolyard instead
of playing with his comrades. He was sick, he said, and he looked it. He tried to seem
to be looking everywhere but whither he really was looking—down the road. Presently Jeff
Thatcherhoff in sight, and Tom's face lighted. He gazed a moment and then turned sorrowfully
away. When Jeff arrived Tom accosted him and led up, warily, to opportunities for remark
about Becky, but the giddy lad never could see the bait. Tom watched and watched, hoping
whenever a frisking frock came in sight, and hating the owner of it as soon as he saw she
was not the right one. At last frocks ceased to appear, and he dropped hopelessly into
their dumps. He entered the empty schoolhouse and sat down to suffer.
Then one more frock passed in at the gate, and Tom's heart gave a great bound. The next
instant he was out, and going on like an Indian, yelling and laughing and chasing boys, jumping
over the fence at risk of life and limb, throwing hand-springs, standing on his head, doing
the heroic things he could conceive of, and keeping a furtive eye out all the while to
see if Becky Thatcher was noticing. But she seemed to be unconscious of it all. She never
looked. Could it be possible that she was not aware that he was there? He carried his
exploits to her immediate vicinity, came war-whooping around, snatched a body's cap, hurled it to
the roof of the schoolhouse, broke through a group of boys, tumbling them in every direction,
and fell sprawling, himself, under Becky's nose, almost upsetting her, and she turned,
with her nose in the air, and he heard her say,
"'Humph! Some people think their mighty smart-hall was showing off!'
Tom's cheeks burned. He gathered himself up and sneaked off, crushed and crestfallen.
XIII.
The pirate crew set sail.
Tom's mind was made up now. He was gloomy and desperate. He was a
forsaken, friendless boy, he said. Nobody loved him. When they found
out what they had driven him to, perhaps they would be sorry. He had
tried to do right and get along, but they would not let him. Since
nothing would do them but to get rid of him, let it be so. And let them
blame him for the consequences. Why shouldn't they? What right had the
friendless to complain? Yes, they had forced him to it at last. He would
lead a life of crime. There was no choice. By this time he was far down
Meadow Lane, and the bell for school to take up tingled faintly upon his
ear. He sobbed, now, to think he should never, never hear that old
familiar sound any more. It was very hard, but it was forced on him.
Since he was driven out into the cold world, he must submit. But he
forgave them.
Then the sobs came thick and fast. Just at this point he met his soul's
sworn comrade, Joe Harper, hard-eyed and with evidently a great and
heart. Plainly, here were two souls with but a single thought. Tom, wiping
his eyes with his sleeve, began to blubber out something about a
resolution to escape from hard usage and lack of sympathy at home by
roaming abroad into the great world never to return, and ended by hoping
that Joe would not forget him.
But it transpired that this was a request which Joe had just been going
to make of Tom, and had come to hunt him up for that purpose. His mother
had whipped him for drinking some cream which he had never tasted and
knew nothing about. It was plain that she was tired of him and wished
him to go. If she felt that way, there was nothing for him to do but
succumb. He hoped she would be happy, and never regret having driven
her poor boy out into the unfeeling world to suffer and die.
As the two boys walked sorrowing along, they made a new compact to
stand by each other and be brothers, and never separate till death
relieved them of their troubles. Then they began to lay their plans.
Joe was for being a hermit, and living on crusts in a remote cave, and
dying, some time, of cold and want and grief. But after listening to
Tom, he conceded that there were some conspicuous advantages about a
life of crime, and so he consented to be a pirate. Three miles below St.
Petersburg, at a point where the Mississippi River was a trifle over a
There was a long, narrow, wooded island, with a shallow bar at the head
of it, and this offered well as a rendezvous. It was not inhabited, it
lay far over towards the further shore, abreast a dense and almost
wholly unpeopled forest. So Jackson's island was chosen. Who were to be
the subjects of their piracies was a matter that did not occur to them.
Then they hunted up Huckleberry Finn, and he joined them promptly for
careers were won to him. He was indifferent. They presently separated to
meet at a lonely spot on the river bank, two miles above the village, at
the favorite hour, which was midnight. There was a small log raft there
which they meant to capture. Each would bring hooks and lines, and such
provision as he could steal in the most dark and mysterious way, as
became outlaws. And before the afternoon was done, they had all managed
to enjoy the sweet glory of spreading the fact that pretty soon the town
would hear something. All who got this vague hint were cautioned to be
mum and wait.
About midnight Tom arrived with a boiled ham and a few trifles, and
stopped in a dense undergrowth, on a small bluff overlooking the meeting
place. It was starlight and very still. The mighty river lay like an
ocean at rest. Tom listened a moment, but no sound disturbed the quiet.
Then he gave a low, distinct whistle. It was answered from under the
twice more. These signals were answered in the same way. Then a guarded
voice said,
"'Who goes there?'
"'Tom Sawyer, the black avenger of the Spanish main. Name your names!'
"'Huck Finn, the red-handed, and Joe Harper, the terror of the seas!'
Tom had furnished these titles from his favorite literature. "'Tis well.
Give the countersign.' Two hoarse whispers delivered the same awful word
simultaneously to the brooding night.
"'Blood!'
Then Tom tumbled his ham over the bluff and let himself down after it,
tearing both skin and clothes to some extent in the effort. There was
an easy, comfortable path along the shore under the bluff, but it lacked
the advantages of difficulty in danger so valued by a pirate. The
terror of the seas had brought a side of bacon, and had about worn
himself out with getting it there. Finn, the red-handed, had stolen a
skillet and a quantity of half-cured leaf tobacco, and had also brought
a few corn cobs to make pipes with. But none of the pirates smoked or
chewed but himself. The black avenger of the Spanish main said it would
never do to start without some fire. That was a wise thought. Matches
were hardly known there in that day. They saw a fire smoldering upon a
great raft a hundred yards above, and they went stealthily thither and
helped themselves to a chunk. They made an imposing adventure of it,
saying, "'Hist!' every now and then, and suddenly halting with finger on
lip, moving with hands on imaginary dagger-hilts, and giving orders in
dismal whispers that, if the foe stirred, to, let him have it to the
hilt, because dead men tell no tales. They knew well enough that the
Rouse men were all down at the village laying in stores or having a
spree, but still that was no excuse for their conducting this thing in
unparadical way.
They shoved off presently, Tom in command, Huck at the after oar, and
Joe at the forward. Tom stood amidst ships gloomy-browed and with folded
arms, and gave his orders in a low, stern whisper,
"'Luff, and bring her to the wind!'
"'Ay, ay, sir!'
"'Steady, steady!'
"'Steady it is, sir.'
"'Let her go off a point.'
"'Point it is, sir.'
As the boys steadily and monotonously drove the raft toward mid-stream,
it was no doubt understood that these orders were given only for style,
and were not intended to mean anything in particular.
"'What sails she carrying?'
"'Courses, top sails, and flying jib, sir.'
"'Send the riles up. Lay out a loft there. Half a dozen a year. For top
manstel, sir. Lively now.'
"'Ay, ay, sir.'
"'Shake out that main to Galan, sir. Sheets and braces. Now, my hearties.'
"'Heel him a lee. Hire to port. Stand by to meet her when she comes.
Port, port, now, men. With a will. Steady. Steady it is, sir.'
The raft drew beyond the middle of the river. The boys pointed her head
right, and then lay on their oars. The river was not high, so there was
not more than a two- or three-mile current. Hardly a word was said during
the next three-quarters of an hour. Now the raft was passing before the
summering light showed where it lay, peacefully sleeping, beyond the vague
vast sweep of a star-gemmed water, unconscious of the tremendous event
that was happening. The Black Avenger stood still with folded arms,
looking his last upon the scene of his former joys and his later
sufferings, and wishing she could see him now, abroad on the wild sea,
facing peril and death with dauntless heart, going to his doom with a
small strain on his imagination to remove Jackson the Island beyond
eye-shot of the village, and so he looked his last with a broken and
satisfied heart. The other pirates were looking their last, too, and
they all looked so long that they came near letting the current drift
them out of the range of the island, but they discovered the danger in
time and made shift to avert it. About two o'clock in the morning the
raft grounded on the bar two hundred yards above the head of the
island, and they waited back and forth until they had landed their
freight. Part of the little raft's belongings consisted of an old sail,
and this they spread over a nook in the bushes for a tent to shelter
their provisions, but they themselves would sleep in the open air in
good weather, as became outlaws. They built a fire against the side of
a great log twenty or thirty steps within the somber depths of the
forest, and then cooked some bacon in the frying-pan for supper, and
used up half of the corn-pone stock they had brought. It seemed glorious
sport to be feasting in that wild freeway in the virgin forest of an
unexplored and uninhabited island, far from the haunts of men, and they
said they never would return to civilization. The climbing fire lit up
their faces and threw its ruddy glare upon the pillared tree-trunks of
their forest temple, and upon the varnished foliage and festooning
vines. When the last crisp slice of bacon was gone, and the last
allowance of corn-pone devoured, the boys stretched themselves out in the
grass, filled with contentment. They could have found a cooler place,
but they would not deny themselves such a romantic feature as the
roasting camp-fire.
"'Ain't it gay?' said Joe.
"'It's nuts,' said Tom. What would the boys say if they could see us?'
"'Say? Well, they'd just die to be here. Hey, Hucky!'
"'I reckon so,' said Huckleberry. Anyways, I'm suited. I don't want
enough to eat, generally, and here they can't come and pick at a
feller and bully-rag him so.'
"'It's just the life for me,' said Tom. You don't have to get up,
mornings, and you don't have to go to school and wash and all that
blame-foolishness. You see, a pirate don't have to do anything, Joe,
when he's ashore, but a hermit. He has to be a praying considerable,
and then he don't have any fun, anyway, all by himself that way.'
"'Oh, yes, that's so,' said Joe. But I hadn't thought much about it,
I had a good deal rather be a pirate, now that I've tried it.'
"'You see,' said Tom, people don't go much on hermits nowadays,
like they used to in the old times. But a pirate's always respected,
and a hermit's got to sleep on the hardest place he can find, and put
sackcloth and ashes on his head, and stand out in the rain, and what
does he put sackcloth and ashes on his head for?' inquired Huck.
"'I don't know, but they's got to do it. Hermits always do. You'd have
to do that if he was a hermit.'
"'Durned if I would,' said Huck.
"'Well, what would you do?'
"'I don't know, but I wouldn't do that.'
"'Why, Huck, you'd have to. How'd you get around it?'
"'Why, I just wouldn't stand it. I'd run away.'
"'Run away? Well, you would be a nice old slouch of a hermit. You'd be
a disgrace.' The red-handed made no response, being better employed. He
had finished gouging out a cob, and now he fitted a weed-stem to it,
loaded it with tobacco, and was pressing a coal to the charge and
blowing a cloud of fragrant smoke. He was in the full bloom of luxurious
contentment. The other pirates envied him this majestic vice, and
secretly resolved to acquire it shortly. Presently, Huck said,
"'What does pirates have to do?'
Tom said, "'Oh, they have just a bully time. Take ships and burn them,
and get the money and bury it in awful places in their island, where
there's ghosts and things to watch it, and kill everybody in the ships,
and make them walk a plank.'
"'And they carry the women to the island,' said Joe.
"'They don't kill the women.'
"'No,' assented Tom. They don't kill the women. They're too noble,
and the women's always beautiful, too.'
"'And don't they wear the bulliest clothes? Oh, no. All gold and silver
and diamonds,' said Joe, with enthusiasm.
"'Who?' said Chuck.
"'Why, the pirates.'
Huck scanned his own clothing forlornly.
"'I reckon I ain't dressed fitting for a pirate,' said he, with a
regretful pathos in his voice.
"'But I ain't got none but these.'
But the other boys told him the fine clothes would come fast enough
after they should have begun their adventures. They made him
understand that his poor rags would do to begin with, though it was
customary for wealthy pirates to start with a proper wardrobe.
Gradually their talk died out, and drowsiness began to steal upon the
eyelids of the little waifs. The pipe dropped from the fingers of the
red-handed, and he slept the sleep of the conscience-free and the
black avenger of the Spanish main had more difficulty in getting to
sleep. They said their prayers inwardly and lying down, since there
was nobody there with authority to make them kneel and recite aloud.
In truth they had a mind not to say them at all, but they were afraid
to proceed to such lengths at that, lest they might call down a sudden
and special thunderbolt from heaven. Then at once they reached and
hovered upon the imminent verge of sleep. But an intruder came now that
would not down. It was conscience. They began to feel a vague fear that
they had been doing wrong to run away, and next they thought of the
stolen meat, and then the real torture came. They tried to argue it
away by reminding conscience that they had purloined sweetmeats and
apple-scores at times, but conscience was not to be appeased by such
thin plausibilities. It seemed to them in the end that there was no
getting around the stubborn fact that taking sweetmeats was only
cooking, while taking bacon and hams and such valuables was plain simple
stealing—and there was a command against that in the Bible. So they
inwardly resolved that so long as they remained in the business, their
piracies should not again be sullied with the crime of stealing. Then
conscience granted a truce, and these curiously inconsistent pirates
fell peacefully to sleep.
When Tom awoke in the morning he wondered where he was. He sat up and
rubbed his eyes and looked around. Then he comprehended. It was the
cool, grey dawn, and there was a delicious sense of repose and peace in
the deep, pervading calm and silence of the woods. Not a leaf stirred,
not a sound obtruded upon great nature's meditation. Beaded dewdrops
melted upon the leaves and grasses. A white layer of ashes covered the
fire, and a thin blue breath of smoke rose straight into the air. Joe
and Huck still slept. Now, far away in the woods, a bird called. Another
answered. Presently the hammering of a Whitpecker was heard. Gradually
the cool, dim grey of the morning whitened, and as gradually sounds
multiplied and life manifested itself. The marvel of nature, shaking off
sleep and going to work, unfolded itself to the musing boy. A little
green worm came crawling over a dewy leaf, lifting two-thirds of his
body into the air from time to time, and sniffing around, then proceeding
again. For he was measuring, Tom said, and when the worm approached him
of its own accord, he sat as still as a stone, with his hopes rising and
falling by turns, as the creature still came toward him, or seemed
inclined to go elsewhere.
And when at last it considered a painful moment with its curved body in
the air, and then came decisively down upon Tom's leg, and began
journeying over him, his whole heart was glad, for that meant that he
was going to have a new suit of clothes, without the shadow of a doubt
a gaudy, piratical uniform. Now a procession of ants appeared, from
nowhere in particular, and went about their labours. One struggled
manfully by, with a dead spider five times as big as itself in its
arms, and lugged it straight up a tree trunk. A brown-spotted ladybug
climbed a dizzy height of a grass blade, and Tom bent down close to it
and said,
"'Ladybug, ladybug, fly away home! Your house is on fire, your children's
alone!' And she took wing and went off to see about it. Which did not
surprise the boy, for he knew of old that this insect was credulous
about conflagrations, and he had practised upon its simplicity more
than once. A tumble-bug came next, heaving sturdily at its ball, and
Tom touched the creature to see it shut its legs against its body and
pretend to be dead. The birds were fairly rioting by this time. A cat
bird, the northern mocker, lit in a tree over Tom's head, and trilled
out imitations of her neighbours in a rapture of enjoyment. Then a
jay swept down, a flash of blue flame, and stopped on a twig almost
within the boy's reach. Cocked his head to one side and eyed the
strangers with a consuming curiosity. A grey squirrel and a big fellow
of the fox-kind came scurrying along, sitting up at intervals to inspect
and chatter at the boys, for the wild things had probably never seen a
human being before, and scarcely knew whether to be afraid or not. All
nature was wide awake and stirring now. Long lances of sunlight pierced
down through the dense foliage far and near, and a few butterflies came
fluttering upon the scene. Tom stirred up the other pirates, and they
all clattered away with a shout, and in a minute or two were stripped
and chasing after and tumbling over each other in the shallow, limpid
water of the white sandbar. They felt no longing for the little village
sleeping in the distance, beyond the majestic waste of water. A vagrant
current, or a slight rise in the river, had carried off their raft, but
this only gratified them since its going was something like burning the
bridge between them and civilization. They came back to camp wonderfully
refreshed, glad-hearted, and ravenous, and they soon had the campfire
blazing up again. Huck found a spring of clear cold water close by, and
the boys made cups of broad oak or hickory leaves, and felt that water,
sweetened with such a wildwood charm as that, would be a good enough
substitute for coffee.
While Joe was slicing bacon for breakfast, Tom and Huck asked him to
hold on a minute. They stepped to a promising nook in the river bank
and threw in their lines. Almost immediately they had reward. Joe had
not had time to get impatient before they were back again with some
handsome bass, a couple of sun-perch, and a small catfish—provisions
enough for quite a family. They fried the fish with the bacon, and were
astonished, for no fish had ever seemed so delicious before. They did
not know that the quicker a fresh-water fish is on the fire after it is
caught the better he is, and they reflected little upon what a sauce
open-air sleeping, open-air exercise, bathing, and a large ingredient of
hunger makes, too. They lay around in the shade after breakfast while
Huck had a smoke, and then went off through the woods on an exploring
expedition. They trapped gaily along over decaying logs, through tangled
underbrush, among solemn monarchs of the forest, hung from their crowns
to the ground, with a drooping regalia of grape vines. Now and then they
came upon snug nooks carpeted with grass and jeweled with flowers. They
found plenty of things to be delighted with, but nothing to be astonished
at. They discovered that the island was about three miles long and a
quarter of a mile wide, and that the shore it lay it closest to was only
separated from it by a narrow channel hardly two hundred yards wide. They
took a swim about every hour, so it was close upon the middle of the
afternoon when they got back to the camp. They were too hungry to stop to
fish, but they fared sumptuously upon cold ham, and then threw themselves
down in the shade to talk. But the talk soon began to drag, and then died.
The stillness, the solemnity that brooded in the woods, and the sense of
loneliness, began to tell upon the spirits of the boys. They fell to
thinking. A sort of undefined longing crept upon them. This took dim
shape presently. It was budding homesickness. Even Finn, the red-handed,
was dreaming of his doorsteps and empty hogs' heads. But they were all
ashamed of their weakness, and none was brave enough to speak his
thought. For some time now the boys had been dully conscious of a
particular sound in the distance, just as one sometimes is of the
ticking of a clock which he takes no distinct note of. But now this
mysterious sound became more pronounced, and forced a recognition. The
boys started, glanced at each other, and then each assumed a listening
attitude. There was a long silence, profound and unbroken, and then a
deep sullen boom came floating down out of the distance.
"'What is it?' exclaimed Joe, under his breath.
"'I wonder,' said Tom, in a whisper.
"'Taint thunder,' said Elkleberry, in an odd tone. "'Cause thunder—'
Hark!' said Tom. Listen, don't talk."
They waited a time that seemed an age, and then the same muffled boom
troubled the solemn hush.
"'Let's go and see.' They sprang to their feet and hurried to the shore
toward the town. They parted the bushes on the bank and peered out over
the water. The little steam ferry-boat was about a mile below the
village, drifting with a current. Her broad deck seemed crowded with
people. There was a great many skiffs rowing about or floating with a
stream in the neighborhood of the ferry-boat, but the boys could not
determine what the men in them were doing. Presently a great jet of
white smoke burst from the ferry-boat's side, and as it expanded and
rose in a lazy cloud, that same dull throb of sound was borne to the
listeners again.
"'I know now,' exclaimed Tom. "'Somebody's drowned.'
"'That's it,' said Huck. They'd done that last summer when Bill Turner
got drowned. They shoot a cannon over the water, and that makes him
come up to the top. Yes, and they take loads of bread and put quick
silver in them and set them afloat. And wherever there's anybody that's
drowned, they'll float right there and stop.'
"'Yes, I've heard about that,' said Joe. I wonder what makes the bread
do that.'
"'Oh, it ain't the bread so much,' said Tom. I reckon it's mostly what
they say over it before they start it out.'
"'But they don't say anything over it,' said Huck. I've seen them and
they don't.'
"'Well, that's funny,' said Tom. But maybe they say it to themselves.
Of course they do. Anybody might know that.'
The other boys agreed that there was reason in what Tom said, because
an ignorant lump of bread uninstructed by an incantation could not be
expected to act very intelligently when sent upon an errand of such
gravity.
"'By jings, I wish I was over there now,' said Joe.
"'I do too,' said Huck. I'd give heaps to know who it is.'
The boys still listened and watched. Presently a revealing thought
flashed through Tom's mind, and he exclaimed,
"'Boys! I know who's drowned! It's us!'
They felt like heroes in an instant. Here was a gorgeous triumph. They
were missed. They were mourned. Hearts were breaking on their account.
Tears were being shed. Accusing memories of unkindness to these poor
lost lads were rising up, and unavailing regrets and remorse were
being indulged. And best of all, the departed were the talk of the whole
town, and the envy of all the boys, as far as this dazzling notoriety
was concerned. This was fine. It was worth while to be a pirate after
all.'
As twilight drew on, the ferry-boat went back to her accustomed business,
and the skiffs disappeared. The pirates returned to camp. They were
jubilant with vanity over their new grandeur and the illustrious trouble
they were making. They caught fish, cooked supper and ate it, and then
fell to guessing at what the village was thinking and saying about them.
And the pictures they drew of the public distress on their account were
gratifying to look upon, from their point of view. But when the shadows
of night closed them in, they gradually ceased to talk, and sat gazing
at the fire, with their minds evidently wandering elsewhere. The
excitement was gone now, and Tom and Joe could not keep back thoughts
of certain persons at home who were not enjoying this fine frolic as
much as they were. Misgivings came. They grew troubled and unhappy. A
sigh or two escaped unawares. By and by Joe timidly ventured upon a
roundabout feeler as to how the others might look upon a return to
civilization. Not right now, but—
Tom withered him with derision. Huck, being uncommitted as yet, joined
in with Tom, and the waverer quickly explained, and was glad to get out
of the scrape with as little taint of chicken-hearted homesickness
clinging to his garments as he could. Mutiny was effectually laid to rest
for the moment. As the night deepened, Huck began to nod and presently to
snore. Joe followed next. Tom lay upon his elbow motionless for some time
watching the two intently. At last he got up cautiously on his knees
and went searching among the grass and the flickering reflections flung
by the campfire. He picked up and inspected several large semi-cylinders
of the thin white bark of a sycamore, and finally chose two which seemed
to suit him. Then he knelt by the fire and painfully wrote something
upon each of these with his red keel. One he rolled up and put in his
jacket pocket, and the other he put in Joe's hat and removed it to a
little distance from the owner. And he also put into the hat certain
school-boy treasures of almost inestimable value, among them a lump of
chalk, an India rubber ball, three fish-hooks, and one of that kind of
marbles known as the—sure enough—crystal. Then he tiptoed his way
cautiously among the trees till he felt that he was out of hearing, and
straightway broke into a keen run in the direction of the sand-bar.
Tom's Stealthy Visit Home
A few minutes later Tom was in the shoal-water of the bar, wading toward
the Illinois shore. Before the depth reached his middle he was halfway
over. The current would permit no more wading now, so he struck out
confidently to swim the remaining hundred yards. He swam quartering
upstream, but still was swept downward rather faster than he had
expected. However, he reached the shore finally, and drifted along till
he found a low place and drew himself out. He put his hand on his jacket
pocket, found his piece of bark safe, and then struck through the woods
following the shore with streaming garments. Shortly before ten o'clock
he came out into an open place opposite the village, and saw the
ferry-boat lying in the shadow of the trees and the high bank. Everything
was quiet under the blinking stars. He crept down the bank, watching with
all his eyes, slipped into the water, swam three or four strokes, and
climbed into the skiff that did yawl-duty at the boat's stern. He laid
himself down under the thwarps and waited, panting. Presently the
cracked bell tapped, and a voice gave the order to cast off. A minute or
two later the skiff's head was standing high up, against the boat's
swell, and the voyage was begun. Tom felt happy in his success, for he
knew it was the boat's last trip for the night. At the end of a long
twelve or fifteen minutes the wheel stopped, and Tom slipped overboard
and swam ashore in the dusk, landing fifty yards downstream, out of
danger of possible stragglers. He flew along unfrequented alleys, and
shortly found himself at his aunt's back fence. He climbed over,
approached the El, and looked in at the sitting-room window, for a light
was burning there. There sat Aunt Polly, Sid, Mary, and Joe Harper's
mother grouped together, talking. They were by the bed, and the bed was
between them and the door. Tom went to the door, and began to softly
lift the latch. Then he pressed gently, and the door yielded a crack. He
continued pushing, cautiously, and quaking every time it creaked, till
he judged he might squeeze through on his knees. So he put his head
through, and began whirly.
"'What makes the candles blow so?' said Aunt Polly. Tom hurried up.
"'Why, that door's open, I believe. Why, of course it is. No end of
Tom disappeared under the bed just in time. He lay and breathed himself
for a while, then crept to where he could almost touch his aunt's foot.
"'But as I was saying,' said Aunt Polly, "'he warn't bad, so to say,
only mischievous, only just giddy and harem-scarum, you know. You warn't
any more responsible than a colt. He never meant any harm, and he was
the best-hearted boy that ever was.' And she began to cry. It was just
so with my Joe, always full of his devilment and up to every kind of
mischief, but he was just as unselfish and kind as he could be. And
laws bless me to think I went and whipped him for taking that cream,
never once recollecting that I throwed it out myself because it was
sour, and I never to see him again in this world, never, never, never,
poor abused boy.' And Mrs. Harper sobbed as if her heart would break.
"'I hope Tom's better off where he is,' said Sid. But if he'd been
better in some ways—Sid!' Tom felt the glare of the old lady's eye,
though he could not see it. Not a word against my Tom, now that he's
gone. God'll take care of him. Never you trouble yourself, sir. Oh,
Mrs. Harper, I don't know how to give him up. I don't know how to give
him up. He was such a comfort to me, although he tormented my old heart
out of me, most. The Lord giveth and the Lord hath taken away. Blessed
be the name of the Lord. But it's so hard, oh, it's so hard. Only last
Saturday my Joe busted a firecracker right under my nose, and I knocked
him sprawling. Little did I know then how soon—oh, if it was to do
over again, I'd hug him and bless him for it.'
"'Yes, yes, yes, I know just how you feel, Mrs. Harper. I know just
exactly how you feel. No longer ago than yesterday noon my Tom took and
filled the cat full of painkiller. And I did think the creature would
tear the house down. And, God forgive me, I cracked Tom's head with my
thimble, poor boy, poor dead boy. But he's out of all his troubles now,
and the last words I ever heard him say was to reproach. But this
memory was too much for the old lady, and she broke entirely down. Tom
was snuffling now himself, and more in pity of himself than anybody
else. He could hear Mary crying and putting in a kindly word for him
from time to time. He began to have a nobler opinion of himself than
ever before. Still, he was sufficiently touched by his aunt's grief to
long to rush out from under the bed and overwhelm her with joy, and the
theatrical gorgeousness of the thing appealed strongly to his nature,
too. But he resisted, and lay still. He went on listening, and gathered
by odds and ends that it was conjectured at first that the boys had
drowned while taking a swim. Then the small raft had been missed. Next
certain boys said the missing lads had promised that the village should
hear something soon. The wise heads had put this and that together, and
decided that the lads had gone off on that raft, and would turn up at
the next town below presently. But toward noon the raft had been found,
lodged against the Missouri shore some five or six miles below the
village, and then hope perished. They must be drowned, else hunger would
have driven them home by nightfall if not sooner. It was believed that
the search for the bodies had been a fruitless effort merely because
the drowning must have occurred in mid-channel, since the boys, being
good swimmers, would otherwise have escaped to shore. This was Wednesday
night. If the bodies continued missing until Sunday, all hope would be
given over, and the funerals would be preached on that morning. Tom
shuddered. Mrs. Harper gave a sobbing good night and turned to go. Then,
with a mutual impulse, the two bereaved women flung themselves into each
other's arms, and had a good consoling cry, and then parted. Aunt Polly
was tender far beyond her want. In her good night to Sid and Mary, Sid
snuffled a bit, and Mary went off crying with all her heart. Aunt Polly
knelt down and prayed for Tom so touchingly, so appealingly, and with
such measureless love in her words and her old trembling voice, that he
was weltering in tears again long before she was through. He had to keep
still long after she went to bed, for she kept making broken-hearted
ejaculations from time to time, tossing unrestfully and turning over, but
alas, she was still only moaning a little in her sleep.
Now the boy stole out, rose gradually from the bedside, shaded the candle
light with his hand, and stood regarding her. His heart was full of
pity for her. He took out his sycamore scroll and placed it by the
candle, but something occurred to him, and he lingered considering. His
face lighted with a happy solution of his thought. He put the bark
hastily in his pocket. Then he bent over and kissed the faded lips, and
straightway made his stealthy exit, latching the door behind him. He
threaded his way back to the fairy landing, found nobody at large there,
and walked boldly on board the boat, for he knew she was tenantless
except that there was a watchman who always turned in and slept like a
slave in image. He untied the skiff at the stern, slipped into it, and
was soon rowing cautiously up-stream. When he had pulled a mile above
the village, he started quartering across and bent himself stoutly to
his work. He hit the landing on the other side neatly, for this was a
familiar bit of work for him. He was moved to capture the skiff, arguing
that it might be considered a ship and therefore a legitimate prey for a
pirate, but he knew a thorough search would be made for it, and that
might end in revelations. So he stepped ashore and entered the wood. He
sat down and took a long rest, torturing himself meantime to keep awake,
and then started warily down the home stretch. The night was far spent,
it was broad daylight before he found himself fairly abreast the
highland bar. He rested again until the sun was well up and gilding the
great river with its splendor, and then he plunged into the stream. A
little later he paused, dripping upon the threshold of the camp, and
heard Joe say,--"No,
Tom's true blue, Huck. He'll come back. He won't desert. He knows that would be
a disgrace to a pirate, and Tom's too proud for that sort of thing.
He's up to something or other."--"I wonder
what?"--"Well,
the things is ours, anyway, ain't they?"--"Pretty
near, but not yet, Huck. The writing says they are if he ain't back here to breakfast."--"Which
he is!" exclaimed
Tom, with fine dramatic effect, stepping
grandly into camp. A sumptuous breakfast of bacon and fish was
shortly provided, and as the boys set to work upon it Tom recounted,
and adorned, his adventures. They were a vain and boastful company of
heroes when the tale was done. Then Tom hid himself away in a shady
nook to sleep till noon, and the other pirates got ready to fish and
explore.
XVI.
First Pipes.
I've lost my knife.
After dinner all the gang turned out to hunt for turtle-eggs on the bar.
They went about poking sticks into the sand, and when they found a soft place they went
down on their knees and dug with their hands.
Sometimes they would take fifty or sixty eggs out of one hole.
They were perfectly round white things, a trifle smaller than an English walnut.
They had a famous fried-egg feast that night, and another on Friday morning.
After breakfast they went whooping and prancing out on the bar, and chased each other round
and round, shedding clothes as they went, until they were naked, and then continued
far away, up the shoal-water of the bar, against the stiff current, which latter tripped their
legs from under them from time to time, and greatly increased the fun.
And now and then they stooped in a group and splashed water on each other's faces with
their palms, gradually approaching each other with averted faces to avoid the strangling
sprays, and finally gripping and struggling till the best man ducked his neighbour, and
then they all went under in a tangle of white legs and arms, and came up blowing, sputtering,
laughing and gasping for breath at one and the same time.
When they were well exhausted, they would run out and sprawl on the dry, hot sand, and
lie there and cover themselves up with it, and by and by break from the water again and
go through the original performance once more.
Finally it occurred to them that their naked skin represented flesh-coloured tights very
fairly, so they drew a ring in the sand and had a circus, with three clowns in it, for
none would yield this proudest post to his neighbour. Next they got their marbles and
played nucks and ring-taw and keeps till that amusement grew stale. Then Joe and Huck had
another swim, but Tom would not venture, because he found that in kicking off his trousers
he had kicked his string of rattlesnake rattles off his ankle, and he wondered how he had
escaped cramps so long without the protection of this mysterious charm. He did not venture
again until he had found it, and by that time the other boys were tired and ready to rest.
They gradually wandered apart and dropped into the dumps, and fell to gazing longingly
across the wide river to where the village lay drowsing in the sun. Tom found himself
writing BECKY in the sand with his big toe. He scratched it out and was angry with himself
for his weakness. But he wrote it again, nevertheless. He could not help it. He erased it, once
more, and then took himself out of temptation by driving the other boys together and joining
them.
But Joe's spirits had gone down almost beyond resurrection. He was so homesick that he could
hardly endure the misery of it. The tears lay very near the surface. Huck was melancholy,
too. Tom was downhearted, but tried hard not to show it. He had a secret, which he was
not ready to tell yet, but if this mutinous depression was not broken up soon he would
have to bring it out. He said, with a great show of cheerfulness,
"'I bet there's been pirates on this island before, boys. We'll explore it again. They've
hid treasures here somewhere.' How'd you feel to light on a rotten chest full of gold and
silver, eh?'
But it roused only a faint enthusiasm, which faded out with no reply. Tom tried one or
two other seductions, but they failed, too. It was discouraging work. Joe sat poking up
the sand with a stick, and looking very gloomy. Finally he said,
"'Oh, boys, let's give it up. I want to go home. It's so lonesome.'
"'Oh, no, Joe, you'll feel better by and by,' said Tom. Just think of the fishing that's
here.'
"'I don't care for fishing. I want to go home. But, Joe, there ain't such another swimming
place anywhere.'
"'Swimming's no good. I don't seem to care for it. Somehow, when there ain't anybody
to say I shan't go in, I mean to go home.'
"'Oh, shucks! Baby! You want to see your mother, I reckon?'
"'Yes, I do want to see my mother. And you would, too, if you had one. I ain't any more
baby than you are.' Joe snuffled a little.
"'Well, we'll let the crybaby go home to his mother, won't we, Huck?'
"'Poor thing! Does it want to see its mother? And so it shall. You like it here, don't you,
Huck? We'll stay, won't we?'
Huck said,
"'Yes,' without any heart in it. I'll never speak to you again as long as I live,' said
Joe, rising. There, now.' And he moved moodily away and began to dress himself.
"'Who cares?' said Tom. Nobody wants you to. Go along home and get laughed at. Oh, you're
a nice pirate. Huck and me ain't crybabies. We'll stay, won't we, Huck? Let him go if
he wants to. I reckon we can get along without him, perhaps.'
But Tom was uneasy, nevertheless, and was alarmed to see Joe go sullenly on with his
dressing. And then it was discomforting to see Huck eyeing Joe's preparations so wistfully,
and keeping up such an ominous silence. Presently, without a parting word, Joe began to wade
off toward the Illinois shore. Tom's heart began to sink. He glanced at Huck. Huck could
not bear the look, and dropped his eyes, and then he said,
"'I want to go too, Tom. It was getting so lonesome anyway, and now it'll be worse. Let's
us go too, Tom.'
"'I won't. You can all go if you want to. I mean to stay.'
"'Tom, I'd better go.'
"'Well, go along. Who's hindering you?' Huck began to pick up his scattered clothes,
and he said,
"'Tom, I wish you'd come too. Now you think it over. We'll wait for you when we get to
the shore.'
"'Well, you'll wait a blame long time, that's all.'
Huck started sorrowfully away, and Tom stood looking after him, with a strong desire tugging
at his heart to yield his pride and go along too. He hoped the boys would stop, but they
still waited slowly on. It suddenly dawned on Tom that it was become very lonely and
still. He made one final struggle with his pride, and then darted after his comrades
yelling,
"'Wait! Wait! I want to tell you something!'
They presently stopped and turned around. When he got to where they were, he began unfolding
his secret, and they listened moodily till at last they saw the point he was driving
at. And then they set up a war-whoop of applause, and said it was splendid, and said if he had
told them at first they wouldn't have started away. He made a plausible excuse, but his
real reason had been the fear that not even the secret would keep them with him any very
length of time, and so he had meant to hold it in reserve as a last seduction. The lads
came gaily back and went at their sports-gen with a will, chattering all the time about
Tom's stupendous plan and admiring the genius of it. After a dainty egg and fish dinner,
Tom said he wanted to learn to smoke now. Joe caught at the idea and said he would like
to try too. So Huck made pipes and filled them. These novices had never smoked anything
before but cigars made of grapevine, and they bit the tongue and were not considered
manly anyway.
Now they stretched themselves out on their elbows and began to puff charrily and with
slender confidence. The smoke had an unpleasant taste, and they gagged a little, but Tom said,
Why, it's just as easy. If I'd a knowed this was all, I'd a learned long ago. So would
I, said Joe, it's just nothing. Why, many a time I've looked at people smoking and thought,
Well, I wish I could do that. But I never thought I could, said Tom.
That's just the way with me, ain't it, Huck? You've heard me talk just that way, haven't
you, Huck? I'll leave it to Huck if I haven't.
Yes, heaps of times, said Huck.
Well, I have too, said Tom. Oh, hundreds of times. Once down by the slaughter-house, don't
you remember, Huck? Bob Tanner was there, and Johnny Miller and Jeff Thatcher when I
said it. Don't you remember, Huck, about me saying that?
Yes, that's so, said Huck. That was the day after I lost a white alley. No, it was the
day before.
There, I told you so, said Tom. Huck recollects it.
I believe I could smoke this pipe all day, said Joe. I don't feel sick.
Neither do I, said Tom. I could smoke it all day. But I bet you Jeff Thatcher couldn't.
Jeff Thatcher! Why, he'd keel over just—with two draws! Just let him try it once! He'd
see.
I bet he would. And Johnny Miller, I wish I could see Johnny Miller tackle it once.
Oh, don't I, said Joe. Why, I bet now Johnny Miller couldn't any more do this than nothing.
Just one little snifter would fetch him.
Indeed it would, Joe. Say, I wish the boys could see us now.
So do I.
Say, boys, don't say anything about it, and some time when they're around I'll come up
to you and say,
Joe, got a pipe? I want to smoke. And you'll say, kind of careless like, as if it weren't
anything, you'll say,
Yes, I got my old pipe, and another one, but my tobacco ain't very good. And I'll say,
Oh, that's all right, if it's strong enough. And then you'll out with the pipes, and we'll
light up just as calm, and then just see them look.
By, jing, that'll be gay, Tom, I wish it was now.
So do I. And when we tell them we learned when we was off pirating, won't they wish
they'd been along?
Oh, I reckon not. I'll just bet they will."
So the talk ran on, but presently it began to flag a trifle and grow disjointed. The
silences widened, the expectoration marvelously increased. Every pore inside the boys' cheeks
became a spouting fountain. They could scarcely bail out the cellars under their tongues fast
enough to prevent an inundation. Little overflowing down their throats occurred in spite of all
they could do, and sudden retchings followed every time. Both boys were looking very pale
and miserable now. Joe's pipe dropped from his nerveless fingers. Tom swallowed. Both
fountains were going furiously, and both pumps bailing with mite and maine. Joe said feebly,
I've lost my knife. I reckon I'd better go and find it.
Tom said with quivering lips and halting utterance,
I'll help you. You go over that way, and I'll hunt around by the spring.
No, you needn't come, Huck. We can find it.
So Huck sat down again and waited an hour. Then he found it lonesome and went to find
his comrades. They were wide apart in the woods, both very pale, both fast asleep. But
something informed him that if they had had any trouble, they'd got rid of it. They were
not talkative at supper that night. They had a humble look, and when Huck prepared his
after the meal, and was going to prepare theirs, they said no, they were not feeling very well.
Something they ate at dinner had disagreed with them.
About midnight Joe awoke and called the boys. There was a brooding oppressiveness in the
air that seemed to bode something. The boys huddled themselves together and sought the
friendly companionship of the fire, though the dull, dead heat of the breathless atmosphere
was stifling. They sat still, intent and waiting. The solemn hush continued.
Beyond the light of the fire everything was swallowed up in the blackness of darkness.
Presently there came a quivering glow that vaguely revealed the foliage for a moment,
and then vanished. By and by another came, a little stronger. Then another. Then a faint
moan came sighing through the branches of the forest, and the boys felt a fleeting breath
upon their cheeks, and shuddered with the fancy that the spirit of the night had gone
by. There was a pause. Now a weird flash turned night into day, and showed every little
grass blade, separate and distinct, and grew about their feet. And it showed three white
startled faces, too. A deep peal of thunder went rolling and tumbling down the heavens,
and lost itself in sullen rumblings in the distance. A sweep of chilly air passed by,
rustling all the leaves and snowing the flaky ashes broadcast about the fire. Another fierce
glare lit up the forest, and an instant crash followed that seemed to rend the treetops
right over the boys' heads. They clung together in terror in the thick gloom that followed.
A few big raindrops fell pattering upon the leaves.
Quick, boys, go for the tent! exclaimed Tom. They sprang away, stumbling over the roots
and among vines in the dark, no two plunging in the same direction. A furious blast roared
through the trees, making everything sing as it went. One blinding flash after another,
and the peal on peal of deafening thunder. And now a drenching rain poured down, and
the rising hurricane drove it in sheets along the ground. The boys cried out to each other,
but the roaring wind and the booming thunder blast drowned their voices utterly. However,
one by one they straggled in at last, and took shelter under the tent, cold, scared,
and streaming with water. But to have company in misery seemed something to be grateful
for. They could not talk, the old sail flat so furiously, even if the other noises would
have allowed them. The tempest rose higher and higher, and presently the sail tore loose
from its fastenings, and went winging away on the blast. The boys seized each other's
hands and fled, with many tumblings and bruises, to the shelter of a great oak tree that stood
upon the river bank. Now the battle was at its highest. Under the ceaseless conflagration
of lightning that flamed in the skies, everything below stood out in clean cut and shadowless
distinction. The bending trees, the billowy river, white with foam, the driving spray
of spume flakes, the dim outlines of the high bluffs on the other side, glimpsed through
the drifting cloud-rack and the slanting veil of rain. Every little while some giant tree
yielded the fight and fell crashing through the younger growth, and the unflagging thunder-peals
came now in ear-splitting explosive bursts, keen and sharp and unspeakably appalling.
The storm culminated in one matchless effort that seemed likely to tear the island to pieces,
burn it up, drown it to the treetops, and blow it away, and deafen every creature in
it all at once at the same moment. It was a wild night for homeless young heads to be
out in.
But at last the battle was done, and the forces retired with weaker and weaker threatenings
and grumblings, and peace resumed her sway. The boys went back to camp, a good deal awed,
but they found there was still something to be thankful for, because the great sycamore,
the shelter of their beds, was a ruin now, blasted by the lightnings, and they were not
under it when the catastrophe happened. Everything in camp was drenched, the campfire as well,
for they were but heedless lads, like their generation, and had made no provision against
rain. Here was matter for dismay, for they were soaked through and chilled. They were
eloquent in their distress, but they presently discovered that the fire had eaten so far
up under the great log it had been built against, where it curved upward and separated itself
from the ground, that a hand-breadth or so of it had escaped wetting. So they patiently
wrought until, with shreds and bark gathered from under sides of sheltered logs, they coaxed
the fire to burn again. Then they piled on great dead boughs till they had a roaring
furnace and were glad-hearted once more. They dried their boiled ham and had a feast, and
after that they sat by the fire and expanded and glorified their midnight adventure until
morning, for there was not a dry spot to sleep on anywhere around. As the sun began to steal
in upon the boys, drowsiness came over them, and they went out on the sandbar and lay down
to sleep. They got scorched out by and by and drearily set about getting breakfast.
After the meal they felt rusty and stiff-jointed and a little homesick once more. Tom saw the
signs and fell to cheering up the pirates as well as he could. But they cared nothing
for marbles or circus or swimming or anything. He reminded them of the imposing secret and
raised a rave cheer. While it lasted he got them interested in a new device. This was
to knock off being pirates for a while and be Indians for a change. They were attracted
by this idea, so it was not long before they were stripped and striped from head to heel
with black mud like so many zebras—all of them chiefs, of course—and then they went
tearing through the woods to attack an English settlement. By and by they separated into
three hostile tribes and darted upon each other from ambush with dreadful war-woops
and killed and scalped each other by thousands. It was a gory day. Consequently it was an
extremely satisfactory one.
They assembled in camp towards supper-time, hungry and happy. But now a difficulty arose.
Hostile Indians could not break the bread of hospitality together without first making
peace, and this was a simple impossibility without smoking a pipe of peace. There was
no other process that they ever had heard of. Two of the savages almost wished they
had remained pirates. However, there was no other way. So, with such show of cheerfulness
as they could muster, they called for the pipe and took their whiff as it passed in
due form. And, behold, they were glad they had gone into savagery, for they had gained
something. They found that they could now smoke a little without having to go and hunt
for lost knife. They did not get sick enough to be seriously uncomfortable. They were not
to fool away this high promise for lack of effort. No, they practiced cautiously after
supper with right fair success, and so they spent a jubilant evening. They were prouder
and happier in their new acquirement than they would have been in the scalping and skinning
of the six nations. We will leave them to smoke and chatter and brag, since we have
no further use for them at present.
PIRATES AT THEIR OWN FUNERAL
But there was no hilarity in the little town that same tranquil Saturday afternoon the
Harpers and Aunt Polly's family were being put into mourning with great grief and many
tears. An unusual quiet possessed the village, although it was ordinarily quiet enough in
all conscience. The villagers conducted their concerns with an absent mind and talked little,
but they sighed often. The Saturday holiday seemed a burden to the children. They had
no heart in their sports and gradually gave them up. In the afternoon Becky Thatcher found
herself moping about the deserted schoolhouse yard and feeling very melancholy, but she
found nothing there to comfort her. She solitiquised,
"'Oh, if I only had a brass and iron knob again! But I haven't got anything now to remember
him by!' and she choked back a little sob.
Presently she stopped and said to herself,
"'It was right here. Oh, if it was to do over again I wouldn't say that. I wouldn't say
it for the whole world. But he's gone now. I'll never, never, never see him any more.'
This thought broke her down and she wandered away, with the tears rolling down her cheeks.
Then quite a group of boys and girls—playmates of Toms and Joes—came by and stood looking
over the paling fence and talking in reverent tones of how Tom did so-and-so the last time
they saw him, and how Joes said this and that small trifle, pregnant with awful prophecy,
as they could easily see now. And each speaker pointed out the exact spot where the lost
lad stood at the time, and then added something like,
"'And I was a-standing just so, just as I am now. And as if you was him, I was as close
as that.' And he smiled just this way, and then something seemed to go all over me, like,
awful, you know, and I never thought what it meant. Of course, but I can see now.'
Then there was a dispute about who saw the dead boys last in life, and many claimed that
dismal distinction, and offered evidences more or less tampered with by the witness.
And when it was ultimately decided who did see the departed last, and exchanged the last
words with them, the lucky parties took upon themselves a sort of sacred importance, and
were gaped at and envied by all the rest. One poor chap, who had no other grandeur to
offer, said, with tolerably manifest pride in the remembrance,
"'Well, Tom Sawyer, he licked me once.' But that bid for glory was a failure. Most of
the boys could say that, and so that cheapened the distinction too much. The group loitered
away, still recalling memories of the lost heroes in awed voices.
When the Sunday-school hour was finished the next morning, the bell began to toll instead
of ringing in the usual way. It was a very still Sabbath, and the mournful sound seemed
in keeping with the musing hush that lay upon nature. The villagers began to gather, loitering
a moment in the vestibule to converse and whispers about the sad event. But there was
whispering in the house. Only the funereal rustling of dresses, as the women gathered
to their seats, disturbed the silence there. None could remember when the little church
had been so full before. There was finally a waiting pause, an expectant dumbness, and
then Aunt Polly entered, followed by Sid and Mary, and they by the Harper family, all in
deep black, and the whole congregation, the old ministers well, rose reverently and stood,
until the mourners were seated in the front pew. There was another communing silence,
broken at intervals by muffled sobs, and then the minister spread his hands abroad and prayed.
A moving hymn was sung, and the text followed, I AM THE RESURRECTION AND THE LIFE.
As the service proceeded, the clergyman drew such pictures of the graces, the winning ways,
and the rare promise of the lost lads, that every soul there thinking he recognized these
pictures, felt a pang in remembering that he had persistently blinded himself to them
always before, and had as persistently seen only faults and flaws in the poor boys. The
minister related many a touching incident in the lives of the departed, too, which illustrated
their sweet, generous natures, and the people could easily see now how noble and beautiful
those episodes were, and remembered with grief that at the time they occurred they had seemed
rank rascalities, well deserving of the cow-hide. The congregation became more and more moved
as the pathetic tale went on, till at last the whole company broke down and joined the
weeping mourners in a chorus of anguished sobs, the preacher himself giving way to his
feelings and crying in the pulpit.
There was a rustle in the gallery which nobody noticed. A moment later the church door creaked.
The minister raised his streaming eyes above his handkerchief and stood transfixed. First
one, and another pair of eyes followed the minister's, and then almost with one impulse
the congregation rose and stared while the three dead boys came marching up the aisle,
Tom in the lead, Joe next, and Huck, a ruin of drooping rags, sneaking sheepishly in the
rear. They had been hid in the unused gallery, listening to their own funeral sermon. Aunt
Polly, Mary, and the Harpers threw themselves upon their restored ones, smothered them with
kisses and poured out thanksgivings, while poor Huck stood abashed and uncomfortable,
not knowing exactly what to do or where to hide from so many unwelcoming eyes. He wavered
and started to slink away, but Tom seized him and said,
"'Aunt Polly, it ain't fair. Somebody's got to be glad to see Huck.'
"'And so they shall. I'm glad to see him, poor motherless thing.'
And the loving attentions Aunt Polly lavished upon him were the one thing capable of making
him more uncomfortable than he was before. Suddenly the minister shouted at the top of
his voice,
"'Praise God, from whom all blessings flow! Sing! And put your hearts in it!'
And they did. Old hundred swelled up with a triumphant burst, and while it shook the
Tom Sawyer the pirate looked around upon the envying juveniles about him, and confessed
in his heart that this was the proudest moment of his life. As the souled congregation trooped
out they said they would almost be willing to be made ridiculous again to hear old hundred
sung like that once more. Tom got more cuffs and kisses that day, according to Aunt Polly's
varying moods, than he had earned before in a year, and he hardly knew which expressed
the most gratefulness to God, and affection for himself.
XVIII. Tom Reveals His Dream Secret.
That was Tom's great secret, the scheme to return home with his brother
pirates and attend their own funerals. They had paddled over to the
Missouri shore in a log, at dusk on Saturday, landing five or six
miles below the village. They had slept in the woods at the edge of
the town till nearly daylight, and had then crept through back lanes
and alleys and finished their sleep in the gallery of the church among
a chaos of invalid benches.
At breakfast Monday morning Aunt Polly and Mary were very loving to
Tom, and very attentive to his wants. There was an unusual amount of
In the course of it, Aunt Polly said,
Well, I don't say it wasn't a fine joke, Tom, to keep everybody
suffering most a week, so you boys had a good time, but it is a pity
you could be so hard-hearted as to let me suffer so. If you could have
come over on a log to go to your funeral, you could have come over and
give me a hint some way that you weren't dead, but only run off. Yes,
you could have done that, Tom, said Mary, and I believe you would, if
had thought of it.
Would you, Tom? said Aunt Polly, her face lightning wistfully. Say, now,
would you, if you'd thought of it?
I—
Well, I don't know. Toot has spoiled everything.
Tom, I hoped you loved me that much, said Aunt Polly, with a grieved
tone that discomfited the boy. It would have been something if you'd
cared enough to think of it, even if you didn't do it.
Now, Auntie, that ain't any harm, pleaded Mary. It's only Tom's giddy
way. He's always in such a rush that he never thinks of anything.
More's the pity, Sid would have thought, and Sid would have come and
done it, too. Tom, you'll look back some day, when it's too late, and
wish you'd cared a little more for me, when it would have cost you so
little.
Now, Auntie, you know I do care for you, said Tom. I'd know it better
if you acted more like it.
I wish now I'd thought, said Tom, with a repentant tone, but I dreamed
you anyway. That's something, ate it. It ain't much. A cat does that
much, but it's better than nothing. What did you dream? Why, Wednesday
night I dreamt that you was sitting over there by the bed, and Sid was
sitting by the wood-box, and Mary next to him. Well, so we did. So we
always do. I'm glad your dreams could take even that much trouble about
us. And I dreamt that Joe Harper's mother was here. Why, she was here.
Did you dream any more? Oh, lots, but it's so dim now. Well, try to
recollect, can't you? Somehow it seems to me that the wind—the wind
blowed. The—the—try harder, Tom. The wind did blow something. Come."
Tom pressed his fingers to his forehead an anxious minute, and then
said,
"'I've got it now. I've got it now. It blowed the candle.'
"'Mercy on us. Go on, Tom. Go on.'
"'And it seems to me that you said, Why, I believe that that door—'
"'Go on, Tom. Just let me study a moment. Just a moment. Oh, yes. You
said you believed the door was open. As I'm sitting here, I did. Didn't
I, Mary? Go on. And then—and then—'
"'Well, I won't be certain, but it seems like—like as if you made Sid
go and—and—'
"'Well? Well, what did I make him do, Tom? What did I make him do? You
made him—you—oh—you made him shut it. Well, for Lyon's sake, I
never heard the beat of that in all my days. Don't tell me there ain't
anything in dreams any more. Serenity Harper shall know of this before
I'm an hour older. I'd like to see her get around this with her rubbish
about superstition. Go on, Tom. Oh, it's all getting just as bright as
day now. Next you said I warn't bad. Only mischievous and harem-scarum,
and not any more responsible than—than—I think it was a colt or
something. And so it was. Well, goodness gracious, go on, Tom. And then
you began to cry. So I did. So I did. Not the first time, neither. And
then—or then Mrs. Harper, she began to cry, and said Joe was just the
same, and she wished she hadn't whipped him for taking cream when she'd
throated out of her own self. Tom, the spirit was upon you. You was a
office-sion. That's what you was a-doing. Land alive. Go on, Tom. Well,
then, Sid, he said—he said—
"'I don't think I said anything,' said Sid."
"'Yes, you did, Sid,' said Mary. "'Shut your heads and let Tom go. What
did he say, Tom?'
"'He said—'
"'I think he said he hoped I was better off where I was gone to, but if
I'd been better sometimes—'
"'There, do you hear that?' It was his very words. And you shut him up
sharp. I lay, I did. There must have been an angel there. There was an
angel there, somewheres. And Mrs. Harper told about Joe scaring her with
a firecracker, and you told about Peter and the painkiller—just as true
as I live. And then there was a whole lot of talk about dragging the
river for us, and about having the funeral Sunday. And then you and old
Miss Harper hugged and cried, and she went. It happened just so. It
Tom, you couldn't have told it more like if you'd seen it. And then what?
Go on, Tom.'
"'Then I thought you prayed for me, and I could see you and hear every
word you said. And you went to bed, and I was so sorry that I took and
wrote on a piece of sycamore bark, We ain't dead, we are only off being
pirates,' and put it on the table by the candle. And then you looked so
good laying there asleep that I thought I went and leaned over and kissed
you on the lips.'
"'Did you, Tom? Did you? I just forgive you everything for that.' And she
sees the boy in a crushing embrace that made him feel like the guiltiest
of villains. It was very kind, even though it was only—'A dream,' said
Soliloquyze, just audibly.
"'Shut up, Sid. A body does just the same in a dream as he'd do if he
was awake. Here's a big mylam apple I've been saving for you, Tom, if
he was ever found again. Now go along to school. I'm thankful to the
good God and Father of us all I've got you back. That's long-suffering
and merciful to them that believe on him and keep his word, though
goodness knows I'm unworthy of it. But if only the worthy ones got his
blessings, and had his hand to help them over the rough places, there's
few enough would smile here or ever enter into his rest when the long
night comes. Go along, Sid, Mary, Tom. Take yourselves off. You've
hindered me long enough.' The children left for school, and the old
lady to call on Mrs. Harper and vanquish her realism with Tom's
marvellous dream. Sid had better judgment than to utter the thought that
was in his mind as he left the house. It was this—
"'Pretty thin. As long as a dream is that. Without any mistakes in it.'
What a hero Tom was become now! He did not go skipping and prancing, but
moved with a dignified swagger as became a pirate who felt that the
public eye was on him. And indeed it was. He tried not to seem to see
the looks or hear the remarks as he passed along, but they were food
and drink to him. Smaller boys than himself flocked at his heels as
proud to be seen with him and tolerated by him, as if he had been the
drummer at the head of a procession, or the elephant leading a menagerie
into town. Boys of his own size pretended not to know he had been away
at all, but they were consuming with envy nevertheless. They would have
given anything to have had that swarthy sun-tanned skin of his, and his
glittering notoriety, and Tom would not have parted with either for a
circus. At school the children made so much of him and of Joe, and
delivered such eloquent admiration from their eyes that the two heroes
were not long in becoming insufferably stuck up. They began to tell
their adventures to hungry listeners, but they only began, it was not a
thing likely to have an end, with imaginations like theirs to furnish
material. And finally, when they got out their pipes and went serenely
puffing around, the very summit of glory was reached. Tom decided that
he could be independent of Becky Thatcher now. Glory was sufficient. He
would live for glory. Now that he was distinguished, maybe she would be
wanting to make up. Well, let her. She should see that he could be as
indifferent as some other people. Presently she arrived. Tom pretended
not to see her. He moved away and joined a group of boys and girls and
began to talk. Soon he observed that she was tripping gaily back and
forth with flushed face and dancing eyes, pretending to be busy chasing
schoolmates and screaming with laughter when she made a capture. But he
noticed that she always made her captures in his vicinity, and that she
seemed to cast a conscious eye in his direction at such times too. It
gratified all the vicious vanity that was in him, and so, instead of
winning him, it only set him up the more, and made him the more diligent
to avoid betraying that he knew she was about. Presently she gave over
to Tom, sky-larking, and moved irresolutely about, sighing once or
twice and glancing furtively and wistfully toward Tom. Then she observed
that now Tom was talking more particularly to Amy Lawrence than to
any one else. She felt a sharp pang and grew disturbed and uneasy at
once. She tried to go away, but her feet were treacherous, and carried
her to the group instead. She said to a girl almost at Tom's elbow with
sham vivacity,
Why, Mary Austin, you bad girl, why didn't you come to Sunday school?
I did come, didn't you see me? Why, no, did you? Where did you sit? I
was in Miss Peter's class, where I always go. I saw you.
Did you? Why, it's funny, I didn't see you. I wanted to tell you about
the picnic.
Oh, that's jolly, who's going to give it? My ma's going to let me have
one. Oh, goody, I hope she'll let me come. Well, she will. The picnic's
for me. She'll let anybody come that I want, and I want you. That's
ever so nice. When is it going to be?
By and by. Maybe about vacation.
Oh, won't it be fun? You going to have all the girls and boys?
Yes, every one that's friends to me, or wants to be. And she glanced
ever so furtively at Tom. But he talked right along to Amy Lawrence
about the terrible storm on the island, and how the lightning tore the
great sycamore tree all to flinders while he was standing within three
feet of it.
Oh, may I come? said Gracie Miller. Yes. And me? said Sally Rogers.
Yes. And me too? said Susy Harper. And Joe? Yes.
And so on, with clapping of joyful hands till all the group had begged
for invitations but Tom and Amy. Then Tom turned coolly away, still
talking, and took Amy with him. Becky's lips trembled, and the tears
came to her eyes. She hid these signs with a forced deity and went on
chattering, but the life had gone out of the picnic now, and out of
everything else. She got away as soon as she could, and hid herself,
and had what her sex called a good cry. Then she sat moody with wounded
pride till the bell rang. She roused up now with a vindictive cast in
her eye, and gave her plaited tails a shake, and said she knew what
she'd do.
At recess Tom continued his flirtation with Amy with jubilant self-satisfaction,
and he kept drifting about to find Becky and lacerate her with a
performance. At last he spied her, but there was a sudden falling of
his mercury. She was sitting cosily on a little bench behind the
schoolhouse looking at a picture book with Alfred Temple, and so
absorbed were they, and their heads so close together over the book
that they did not seem to be conscious of anything in the world besides.
Jealousy ran red hot through Tom's veins. He began to hate himself for
throwing away the chance Becky had offered for a reconciliation. He
called himself a fool, and all the hard names he could think of. He
wanted to cry with vexation. Amy chatted happily along as they walked,
for her heart was singing, but Tom's tongue had lost its function. He
did not hear what Amy was saying, and whenever she paused expectantly
he could only stammer an awkward ascent, which was as often misplaced
as otherwise. He kept drifting to the rear of the schoolhouse again and
to sear his eyeballs with a hateful spectacle there. He could not help
it, and it maddened him to see, as he thought he saw, that Becky
Thatcher never once suspected that he was even in the land of the
living. But she did see, nevertheless, and she knew she was winning
her fight, too, and was glad to see him suffer as she had suffered.
Amy's happy prattle became intolerable. Tom hinted at things he had to
attend to, things that must be done, and time was fleeting. But in vain
the girl chirped on. Tom thought, Oh, hang her! Ain't I ever going to
get rid of her? At last he must be attending to those things, and she
said artlessly that she would be around when school left out, and he
hastened away, hating her for it.
Any other boy, Tom thought, grating his teeth. Any boy in the whole
town but that St. Louis smarty that thinks he dresses so fine and is
aristocracy. Oh, all right, I licked you the first day you ever saw
this town, mister, and I'll lick you again. You just wait till I catch
you out. I'll just take and—
And he went through the motions of thrashing an imaginary boy, pummeling
the air and kicking and gouging. Oh, you do, do you? You holler enough,
do you? Now, then, let that learn you.
And so the imaginary flogging was finished to his satisfaction. Tom
fled home at noon. His conscience could not endure any more of Amy's
grateful happiness, and his jealousy could bear no more of the other
distress.
Becky resumed her picture inspections with Alfred, but as the minutes
dragged along and no Tom came to suffer, her triumph began to cloud, and
she lost interest. Gravity and absent-mindedness followed, and then
melancholy. Two or three times she pricked up her ear at a footstep, but
it was a false hope. No Tom came. At last she grew entirely miserable and
wished she hadn't carried it so far. When poor Alfred seemed that he was
losing her—he did not know how—kept exclaiming,
"'Oh, here's a jolly one! Look at this!' She lost patience at last and
said, "'Oh, don't bother me! I don't care for them!' and burst into
tears and got up and walked away. Alfred dropped alongside and was going
to try to comfort her, but she said, "'Go away and leave me alone, can't
you? I hate you!' So the boy halted, wondering what he could have done,
for she had said she would look at pictures all through the nooning,
and she walked on crying. Then Alfred went musing into the deserted
schoolhouse. He was humiliated and angry. He easily guessed his way to
the truth. The girl had simply made a convenience of him, to vent her
spite upon Tom Sawyer. He was far from hating Tom the Less, when this
thought occurred to him. He wished there was some way to get that boy
into trouble without much risk to himself. Tom's spelling-book fell
under his eye. Here was his opportunity. He gratefully opened to the
lesson for the afternoon and poured ink upon the page. Becky, glancing
in at a window behind him at the moment, saw the act and moved on
without discovering herself. She started homeward now, intending to
find Tom and tell him. Tom would be thankful and their troubles would
be healed. Before she was half-way home, however, she had changed her
mind. The thought of Tom's treatment of her when she was talking about
her picnic came scorching back and filled her with shame. She resolved
to let him get whipped on the damaged spelling-book's account and to
hate him forever into the bargain.
THE CRUELTY OF
I DIDN'T THINK.
Tom arrived at home in a dreary mood, and the first thing his aunt
said to him showed him that he had brought his sorrows to an
unpromising market.
Tom, I have a notion to skin you alive.
Auntie, what have I done?
Well, you've done enough. Here I go over to Serenity Harper, like an
old softie, expecting I'm going to make her believe all that rubbish
about that dream, when, lo and behold you, she'd found out from Joe
that you was over here and heard all the talk we had that night. Tom,
I don't know what is to become of a boy that will act like that. It
makes me feel so bad to think that you could let me go to Serenity
Harper and make such a fool of myself and never say a word.
This was a new aspect of the thing. His smartness of the morning had
seemed to Tom a good joke before, and very ingenious. It merely
looked mean and shabby now. He hung his head and could not think of
anything to say for a moment. Then he said,
Auntie, I wished I hadn't done it, but I didn't think.
Oh, child, you never think. You never think of anything but your own
selfishness. You could think to come all the way over here from
Jackson's Island in the night to laugh at our troubles, and you could
think to fool me with a lie about a dream. But you could never think to
pity us and save us from sorrow.
Auntie, I know now it was mean, but I didn't mean it to be mean. I
didn't honest. And besides, I didn't come over here to laugh at you
that night. What did you come for, then? It was to tell you not to be
uneasy about us, because we hadn't got drowned. Tom, Tom, I would be
the thankfulest soul in this world if I could believe you ever had as
good a thought as that. But you know you never did, and I know it, Tom.
Indeed, indeed, I did, Auntie. I wish I may never stir if I didn't. Oh,
Tom, don't lie. Don't do it. It only makes things a hundred times
worse. It ain't a lie, Auntie. It's the truth. I wanted to keep you from
grieving. That was all that made me come. I'd give the whole world to
believe that. It would cover up a power of sins, Tom. I'd most be
glad you'd run off and acted so bad. But it ain't reasonable, because
why didn't you tell me, child? Why, you see, when you got to talking
about the funeral, I just got all full of the idea of our coming and
hiding in the church, and I couldn't somehow bear to spoil it. So I
just put the bark back in my pocket and kept mum.
What bark? The bark I wrote on to tell you we'd gone pirating. I wished
now you'd waked up. When I kissed you, I do honest. The hard lines in
his aunt's face relaxed, and a sudden tenderness dawned in her eyes.
Did you kiss me, Tom? Why, yes, I did. Are you sure you did, Tom? Why,
yes, I did, Auntie, certain sure. What did you kiss me for, Tom? Because
I loved you so, and you laid there moaning, and I was so sorry. The
words sounded like truth. The old lady could not hide a tremor in her
voice when she said,
"'Kiss me again, Tom, and be off with you to school now, and don't
bother me any more.' The moment he was gone she ran to a closet and got
out the ruin of a jacket which Tom had gone pirating in. Then she
stopped with it in her hand and said to herself,
"'No, I don't dare.' Poor boy, I reckon he'd lied about it. But it's a
blessed, blessed lie. There's such a comfort come from it. I hope the
Lord I know the Lord will forgive him, because it was such good-heartedness
in him to tell it. But I don't want to find out it's a lie. I won't look.'
She put the jacket away and stood by, musing a minute. Twice she put out
her hand to take the garment again, and twice she refrained. Once more
she ventured, and this time she fortified herself with a thought,
"'It's a good lie. It's a good lie. I won't let it grieve me.' So she
sought the jacket pocket. A moment later she was reading Tom's piece of
bark through the flowing tears and saying,
"'I forgive the boy now, if he'd committed a million sins.'
Tom takes Becky's punishment.
There was something about Aunt Polly's manner when she kissed Tom that
swept away his low spirits and made him light-hearted and happy again.
He started to school and had the luck of coming upon Becky Thatcher at
the head of Meadow Lane. His mood always determined his manner. Without
a moment's hesitation he ran to her and said,
"'I acted mighty mean today, Becky, and I'm so sorry. I won't ever,
ever do that way again. As long as I ever live, please make up, won't
you?' The girl stopped and looked at him scornfully in the face.
"'I'll thank you to keep yourself to yourself, Mr. Thomas Sawyer. I'll
never speak to you again.' She tossed her head and passed on. Tom was so
stunned that he had not even presence of mind enough to say,
"'Who cares, Miss Smarty?' until the right time to say it had gone by.
So he said nothing. But he was in a fine rage, nevertheless. He moped
into the schoolyard wishing she were a boy and imagining how he would
trounce her if she were. He presently encountered her and delivered a
stinging remark as he passed. She hurled one in return and the angry
breach was complete. It seemed to Becky, in her hot resentment, that she
could hardly wait for school to take in. She was so impatient to see Tom
flogged for the injured spelling-book. If she had had any lingering
notion of exposing to Alfred Temple, Tom's offensive fling had driven it
entirely away. Poor girl! She did not know how fast she was nearing
trouble herself. The master, Mr. Dobbins, had reached middle age with an
unsatisfied ambition. The darling of his desires was to be a doctor, but
poverty had decreed that he should be nothing higher than a village
schoolmaster. Every day he took a mysterious book out of his desk and
absorbed himself in it at times when no classes were reciting. He kept
that book under lock and key. There was not an urchin in school, but was
perishing to have a glimpse of it, but the chance never came. Every boy
and girl had a theory about the nature of that book, but no two theories
were alike, and there was no way of getting at the facts in the case.
Now, as Becky was passing by the desk, which stood near the door, she
noticed that the key was in the lock. It was a precious moment. She
glanced around, found herself alone, and the next instant she had the
book in her hands. The title page, Professor Somebody's Anatomy,
carried no information to her mind, so she begun to turn the leaves.
She came at once upon a handsomely engraved and colored frontispiece,
a human figure, stark naked. At that moment a shadow fell on the page,
and Tom Sawyer stepped in at the door and caught the glimpse of the
picture. Becky snatched at the book to close it, and had the hard luck
to tear the pictured plate half down the middle. She thrust the
volumes into the desk, turned the key, and burst out crying with shame
and vexation.
Tom Sawyer, you are just as mean as you can be to sneak up on a person
and look at what they're looking at. How could I know you was looking
at anything? You ought to be ashamed of yourself, Tom Sawyer. You know
you're going to tell on me, and I—I—what shall I do? What shall I
do? I'll be whipped, and I never was whipped in school.
Then she stamped her little foot and said,
Be so mean if you want to. I know something that's going to happen.
You just wait, and you'll see. Hateful, hateful, hateful! And she flung
out of the house with a new explosion of crying.
Tom stood still, rather flustered by this onslaught. Presently he said
to himself,
What a curious kind of a fool a girl is. Never been licked in school.
Shucks! What's a licking? That's just like a girl. They're so thin
skinned and chicken-hearted. Well, of course I ain't going to tell old
Dobbins on this little fool, because there's other ways of getting
on her that ain't so mean. But what of it? Old Dobbins will ask who it
was tore his book. Nobody'll answer. Then he'll do just the way he
always does—ask first one, then tether, and when he comes to the
right girl he'll know it, without any telling. Girls' faces always tell
on them. They ain't got any backbone. She'll get licked. Well, it's a
kind of a tight place for Becky Thatcher, because there ain't any way
out of it. Tom conned the thing a moment longer, and then added,
All right, though. She'd like to see me in such a fix. Let her sweat it
out. Tom joined the mob of skylarking scholars outside. In a few
moments the master arrived, and school took in. Tom did not feel a
strong interest in his studies. Every time he stole a glance at the
girl's side of the room, Becky's face troubled him. Considering all
things, he did not want to pity her, and yet it was all he could do to
help it. He could get up no exaltation that was really worthy the name.
Presently the spelling-book discovery was made, and Tom's mind was
entirely full of his own matters for a while after that. Becky roused
up from her lethargy of distress and showed good interest in the
proceedings. She did not expect that Tom could get out of his trouble
by denying that he spilt the ink on the book himself, and she was
right. The denial only seemed to make the thing worse for Tom. Becky
supposed she would be glad of that, and she tried to believe she was
glad of it, but she found she was not certain. When the worst came to
the worst, she had an impulse to get up and tell on Alfred Temple. But
she made an effort, and forced herself to keep still.
"'Because,' said she to herself, "'he'll tell about me tearing the
book, sure.' I wouldn't say a word not to save his life." Tom took his
whipping and went back to his seat, not at all broken-hearted, for he
thought it was possible that he had unknowingly upset the ink on the
spelling-book himself in some skylarking bout. He had denied it for
Tom's sake, and because it was custom, and had stuck to the denial from
principle. A whole hour drifted by, the master sat nodding in his
throne, the air was drowsy with a hum of study. By and by Mr. Dobbins
straightened himself up, yawned, and then unlocked his desk and reached
for his book, but seemed undecided whether to take it out or leave it.
Most of the pupils glanced up languidly, but there was two among them
that watched his movements with intent eyes. Mr. Dobbins fingered his
book absently for a while, then took it out and settled himself in his
chair to read. Tom shot a glance at Becky. He had seen a hunted and
helpless rabbit look as she did, with a gun levelled at its head.
Instantly he forgot his quarrel with her. Quick, something must be done,
done in a flash, too. But the very imminence of the emergency
paralysed his invention. Good, he had an inspiration. He would run and
snatch the book, spring through the door, and fly. But his resolution
shook for one little instant, and the chance was lost. The master
opened the volume. If Tom only had the wasted opportunity back again,
too late. There was no help for Becky now, he said. The next moment
the master faced the school. Every eye sank under his gaze. There was
that in it which smote even the innocent with fear. There was silence
while one might count ten. The master was gathering his wrath. Then he
spoke,—
"'Who tore this book?' There was not a sound. One could have heard a pin
drop. The stillness continued. The master searched face after face for
signs of guilt. "'Benjamin Rogers, did you tear this book?' A denial.
Another pause. "'Joseph Harper, did you?' Another denial. Tom's
uneasiness grew more and more intense into the slow torture of these
proceedings. The master scanned the ranks of boys, considered a while,
then turned to the girls. "'Amy Lawrence!' A shake of the head. "'Gracy
Miller.' The same sign. "'Susan Harper, did you do this?' Another
negative. The next girl was Becky Thatcher. Tom was trembling from head
to foot, with excitement and a sense of hopelessness of the situation.
"'Rebecca Thatcher!' Tom glanced at her face. It was white with terror.
"'Did you tear—no, look me in the face!' Her hands rose in appeal.
"'Did you tear this book?' A thought shot like lightning through Tom's
brain. He sprang to his feet and shouted,—'I done it!' The school
stared in perplexity at this incredible folly. Tom stood a moment to
gather his dismembered faculties, and when he stepped forward to go to
his punishment, the surprise, the gratitude, the adoration that shone
upon him out of poor Becky's eyes, seemed pay enough for a hundred
floggings. Inspired by the splendour of his own act, he took without an
outcry the most merciless flaying that even Mr. Dobbins had ever
administered, and also received with indifference the added cruelty of a
command to remain two hours after school should be dismissed, for he
knew who would wait for him outside till his captivity was done, and
not count the tedious time as loss, either. Tom went to bed that night
planning vengeance against Alfred Temple, for with shame and
repentance Becky had told him all, not forgetting her own treachery,
but even the longing for vengeance had to give way soon to pleasanter
musings, and he fell asleep at last, with Becky's latest words
lingering dreamily in his ear. Tom, how could you be so noble?
ELEQUENCE AND THE MASTER'S GILLED DOME.
Vacation was approaching. The schoolmaster, always severe, grew severer, and more exacting
than ever, for he wanted the school to make a good showing on Examination Day. His rod
and his ferrel were seldom idle now, at least among the smaller pupils. Only the biggest
boys and young ladies of eighteen and twenty escaped lashing. Mr. Dobbin's lashings were
very vigorous ones, too, for although he carried under his wig a perfectly bald and shiny head,
he had only reached middle age, and there was no sign of feebleness in his muscle. As
the great day approached, all the tyranny that was in him came to the surface. He seemed
to take a vindictive pleasure in punishing the least shortcomings. The consequence was
that the smaller boys spent their days in terror and suffering, and their nights in
plotting revenge. They threw away no opportunity to do the master a mischief, but he kept ahead
all the time. The retribution that followed every vengeful success was so sweeping and
that the boys all was retired from the field, badly worsted. At last they conspired together
and hit upon a plan that promised a dazzling victory. They swore in the sign-painter's
boy, told him the scheme, and asked his help. He had his own reason for being delighted,
for the master boarded in his father's family, and had given the boy ample cause to hate
him. The master's wife would go on a visit to the country in a few days, and there would
be nothing to interfere with the plan. The master always prepared himself for great occasions
by getting pretty well-fuddled, and the sign-painter's boy said that when the domine had reached
the proper condition on examination evening, he would manage the thing, while he napped
in his chair. Then he would have him awakened at the right time, and hurried away to school.
In the fullness of time the interesting occasion arrived. At eight in the evening the school-house
was brilliantly lighted, and adorned with wreaths and festoons of foliage and flowers.
The master sat throned in his great chair upon a raised platform with his blackboard
behind him. He was looking tolerably mellow. Three rows of benches on each side, and six
rows in front of him, were occupied by the dignitaries of the town, and by the parents
of the pupils. To his left, back of the rows of citizens, was a spacious temporary platform
upon which were seated the scholars, who were to take part in the exercises of the evening.
Rows of small boys, washed and dressed to an intolerable state of discomfort, rows of
gawky big boys, snow-banks of girls and young ladies clad in lawn and muslim and conspicuously
conscious of their bare arms, their grandmothers' ancient trinkets, their bits of pink and blue
ribbon, and the flowers in their hair. All the rest of the house was filled with non-participating
scholars. The exercises began. A very little boy stood up and sheepishly recited,
"'You'd scarce expect one of my age to speak in public on the stage,' etc., accompanying
himself with the painfully exact and spasmodic gestures which a machine might have used,
supposing the machine to be a trifle out of order. But he got through safely, though cruelly
scared, and got a fine round of applause when he made his manufactured bow and retired.
A little shame-faced girl lisp'd. Mary had a little lamb, etc., performed a compassion-inspired
curtsy, got her mead of applause, and sat down flushed and happy. Tom Sawyer stepped
forward with conceited confidence, and soared into the unquenchable and indestructible
"'Give me liberty or give me death!' speech, with fine fury and frantic gesticulation,
and broke down in the middle of it. A ghastly stage-fright seized him, his legs quaked under
him, and he was like to choke. True, he had the manifest sympathy of the house, but he
had the house's silence, too, which was even worse than its sympathy. The master frowned,
and this completed the disaster. Tom struggled a while, and then retired utterly defeated.
There was a weak attempt at applause, but it died early.
The boy stood on the burning deck, followed. Also, the Assyrian came down—and other declamatory
gems. Then there were reading exercises and a spelling-fight. The meagre Latin class recited
with honour—the prime feature of the evening was in order now—original compositions by
the young ladies. Each in her turn stepped forward to the edge of the platform, cleared
her throat, held up her manuscript tied with dainty ribbon, and proceeded to read with
laboured attention to expression and punctuation. The themes were the same that had been illuminated
upon similar occasions by their mothers before them, their grandmothers, and doubtless all
their ancestors in the female line clear back to the crusades. Friendship was one. Memories
of other days. Religion in history. Dreamland. The advantages of culture. Forms of political
government compared and contrasted. Melancholy. Filial love. Heart longings, etc., etc. A
prevalent feature in these compositions was a nursed and petted melancholy. Another was
a wasteful and opulent gush of fine language. Another was a tendency to lug in by the ears
particularly prized words and phrases until they were worn entirely out, and a peculiarity
that conspicuously marked and marred them was the inveterate and intolerable sermon
that wagged its crippled tail at the end of each and every one of them. No matter what
the subject might be, a brain-wracking effort was made to squirm it into some aspect or
other that the moral and religious mind could contemplate with edification. The glaring
insincerity of these sermons was not sufficient to compass the banishment of the fashion from
the schools, and it is not sufficient today. It never will be sufficient while the world
stands perhaps. There is no school in all our land where the young ladies do not feel
obliged to close their compositions with a sermon, and you will find that the sermon
of the most frivolous and the least religious girl in the school is always the longest and
the most relentlessly pious. But enough of this. Homely truth is unpalatable.
Let us return to the examination. The first composition that was read was one entitled—Is
this, then, life? Perhaps the reader can endure and extract from it. In the
common walks of life, with what delightful emotions does the youthful mind look forward to some
anticipated scene of festivity? Imagination is busy sketching rose-tinted pictures of
joy. In fancy the voluptuous rotary of fashion sees herself amid the festive throng, the
observed of all observers. Her graceful form, arrayed in snowy robes, is whirling through
the mazes of the joyous dance. Her eye is brightest. Her step is lightest in the gay
assembly. In such delicious fancies time quickly glides by, and the welcome hour arrives for
her entrance into the Elysian world, of which she has had such bright dreams. How fairy-like
does everything appear to her enchanted vision? Each new scene is more charming than the last,
but after a while she finds that beneath this goodly exterior all is vanity. The flattery
which once charmed her soul now grates harshly upon her ear. The ballroom has lost its charms,
and with wasted health and embittered heart she turns away with a conviction that earthly
pleasures cannot satisfy the longings of the soul, and so forth and so on. There was
a buzz of gratification from time to time during the reading, accompanied by whispered
ejaculations of how sweet, how eloquent, so true, etc., and after the thing had closed
with a peculiarly afflicting sermon the applause was enthusiastic. Then arose a slight melancholy
girl, whose face had the interesting paleness that comes of pills and indigestion, and read
a poem. Two stanzas of it will do.
A Missouri Maiden's Farewell to Alabama
Alabama, good-bye! I love thee well, but yet for a while do I leave thee now. Sad, yes,
sad thoughts of thee my heart to swell, and burning recollections throng my brow, for
I have wandered through thy flowery woods, have roamed and read near Talapusa's stream,
have listened to Talasea's warring floods, and wooed on Cusa's side Aurora's beam. Yet
shame I not to bear an aweful heart, nor blush to turn behind my tearful eyes, tis from no
stranger land I now must part, tis to no stranger's left I yield these sighs. Welcome and home
were mine within this state, whose veils I leave, whose spires fade fast from me, and
cold must be mine eyes, and heart and tete, when, dear Alabama, they turn cold on thee.
There were very few there who knew what tete meant, but the poem was very satisfactory
nevertheless.
Next appeared a dark-complexion, black-eyed, black-haired young lady, who paused an impressive
moment, assumed a tragic expression, and began to read in a measured, solemn tone.
A vision!
Dark and tempestuous was night. Around the throne on high not a single star quivered,
but the deep intonations of the heavy thunder constantly vibrated upon the ear, whilst the
terrific lightning reveled in angry mood through the cloudy chambers of heaven, seeming to
Even the boisterous winds unanimously came forth from their mystic homes, and blustered
about as if to enhance by their aid the wildness of the scene. At such a time so dark, so dreary,
for human sympathy, my very spirit sighed, but instead thereof,
My dearest friend, my counsellor, my comforter and guide, my joy in grief, my second bliss
in joy, came to my side.
She moved like one of those bright beings pictured in the sunny walks of fancies, Eden,
by the romantic and young, a queen of beauty unadorned save by her own transcendent loveliness.
So soft was her step, it failed to make even a sound, and but for the magical thrill imparted
by her genial touch as other unobtrusive beauties, she would have glided away unperceived, unsought.
A strange sadness rested upon her features, like icy tears upon the robe of December,
as she pointed to the contending elements without and bad me contemplate the two beings
presented.
This nightmare occupied some ten pages of manuscript, and wound up with a sermon so
destructive of all hope to non-Presbyterians that it took the first prize. This composition
was considered to be the very finest effort of the evening. The Mayor of the village,
in delivering the prize to the author of it, made a warm speech in which he said that it
was by far the most eloquent thing he had ever listened to, and that Daniel Webster
himself might well be proud of it. It may be remarked in passing that the number of
compositions in which the word BEAUTIOUS was over-fondled, and human experience referred
to as LIFE'S PAGES, was up to the usual average. Now the Master, mellow almost to the verge
of geniality, put his chair aside, turned his back to the audience, and began to draw
a map of America on the blackboard, to exercise the geography class upon. But he made a sad
business of it, with his unsteady hand, and a smothered titter rippled over the house.
He knew what the matter was, and set himself to write it. He sponged out lines and remade
them, but he only distorted them more than ever, and the tittering was more pronounced.
He threw his entire attention upon his work now, as if determined not to be put down by
the mirth. He felt that all eyes were fastened upon him. He imagined he was succeeding, and
yet the tittering continued. It even manifestly increased, and well it might. There was a
garret above, pierced with a scuttle over his head, and down through this scuttle came
suspended around the haunches by a string. She had a rag tied about her head and jaws
to keep her from ewing. As she slowly descended she curved upward and clawed at the string.
She swung downward and clawed at the intangible air. The tittering rose higher and higher.
The cat was within six inches of the absorbed teacher's head, down, down, a little lower,
and she grabbed his wig with her desperate claws, clung to it, and was snatched up into
the garret in an instant with her trophy still in her possession. And how the light did blaze
abroad from the master's bald pate, for the sign-painter's boy had gilded it! That broke
up the meeting. The boys were avenged. Vacation had come.
NOTE. The pretended compositions quoted in this chapter are taken without alteration
from a volume entitled, PROS AND POETRY BY A WESTERN LADY. But they are exactly and precisely
after the schoolgirl pattern, and hence are much happier than any mere imitations could
be.
Huck Finn quotes scriptures. Tom joined the new order of cadets of temperance,
being attracted by the showy character of their regalia. He promised to abstain from
smoking, chewing, and profanity, as long as he remained a member. Now he found out a new
thing—namely, that to promise not to do a thing is the surest way in the world to
make a body want to go and do that very thing. Tom soon found himself tormented with a desire
to drink and swear. The desire grew to be so intense that nothing but the hope of a
chance to display himself in his red sash kept him from withdrawing from the order.
Fourth of July was coming, but he soon gave that up—gave it up before he had worn his
shackles over forty-eight hours, and fixed his hopes upon old Judge Fraser, Justice of
the Peace, who was apparently on his death-bed and would have a big public funeral, since
he was so high and official. During three days Tom was deeply concerned about the judge's
condition and hungry for news of it. Sometimes his hopes ran so high that he would venture
to get out his regalia and practice before the looking-glass. But the judge had a most
discouraging way of fluctuating. At last he was pronounced upon the mend, and then
convalescent. Tom was disgusted, and felt a sense of injury, too. He handed in his resignation
at once, and that night the judge suffered a relapse and died. Tom resolved that he would
never trust a man like that again. The funeral was a fine thing—the cadets paraded in a
style calculated to kill the late member with envy. Tom was a free boy again, however—there
was something in that. He could drink and swear now, but found to his surprise that
he did not want to. The simple fact that he could took the desire away and the charm of
it. Tom presently wondered to find that his coveted vacation was beginning to hang a little
heavily on his hands. He attempted a diary, but nothing happened during three days, and
so he abandoned it.
The first of all the negro minstrel shows came to town, and made a sensation. Tom and
Joe Harper got up a band of performers and were happy for two days. Even the glorious
fourth was in some sense a failure, for it rained hard, there was no procession in consequence,
and the greatest man in the world, as Tom supposed, Mr. Benton, an actual United States
senator, proved an overwhelming disappointment, for he was not twenty-five feet high, nor
even anywhere in the neighborhood of it. A circus came, the boys played circus for three
days afterward in tents made of rag-carpeting—admission, three pins for boys, two for girls, and then
circusing was abandoned. A phrenologist and a mesmerizer came, and went again, and left
the village duller and drearier than ever. There were some boys' and girls' parties,
but they were so few and so delightful that they only made the aching voids between ache
the harder. Becky Thatcher was gone to her Constantinople home to stay with her parents
during vacation, so there was no bright side to life anywhere. The dreadful secret of the
murder was a chronic misery. It was a very cancer for permanency and pain. Then came
the measles. During two long weeks Tom lay a prisoner, dead to the world and its happenings.
He was very ill. He was interested in nothing. When he got upon his feet at last and moved
feebly downtown, a melancholy change had come over everything and every creature. There
had been a revival, and everybody had got religion—not only the adults, but even the
boys and girls. Tom went about hoping against hope for the sight of one blessed sinful face,
but disappointment crossed him everywhere. He found Joe Harper studying a testament,
and turned sadly away from the depressing spectacle. He sought Ben Rogers, and found
him visiting the poor with a basket of tracts. He handed up Jim Hollis, who called his attention
to the precious blessing of his late measles as a warning. Every boy he encountered added
another ton to his depression, and when, in desperation, he flew for refuge at last to
the bosom of Huckleberry Finn and was received with a scriptural quotation, his heart broke,
and he crept home and to bed, realizing that he alone of all the town was lost forever and forever.
And that night there came on a terrific storm, with driving rain, awful claps of thunder,
and blinding sheets of lightning. He covered his head with his bedclothes and waited in a horror
of suspense for his doom, for he had not the shadow of a doubt that all this hubbub was about
him. He believed he had taxed the forbearance of the powers above to the extremity of endurance,
and that this was the result. It might have seemed to him a waste of pomp and ammunition
to kill a bug with a battery of artillery, but there seemed nothing incongruous about
the getting up such an expensive thunderstorm as this to knock the turf from under an insect
like himself. By and by the tempest spent itself and died without accomplishing its object.
The boy's first impulse was to be grateful and reform. His second was to wait, for there might
be no more storms. The next day the doctors were back. Tom had relapsed. The three weeks he spent
on his back this time seemed an entire age. When he got abroad at last, he was hardly grateful
that he had been spared, remembering how lonely was his estate, how companionless and forlorn he
was. He drifted listlessly down the street and found Jim Hollis acting as judge in a juvenile
court that was trying a cat for murder, in the presence of her victim, a bird. He found Joe
Harper and Huck Finn up an alley eating a stolen melon. Poor lads! They, like Tom, had suffered a
relapse
The Salvation of Muff Potter.
At last the sleepy atmosphere was stirred, and vigorously, the murder trial came on in the court.
It became the absorbing topic of village talk immediately. Tom could not get away from it.
Every reference to the murder sent a shudder to his heart, for his troubled conscience and fears
almost persuaded him that these remarks were put forth in his hearing as feelers. He did not see
how he could be suspected of knowing anything about the murder, but still he could not be
comfortable in the midst of this gossip. It kept him in a cold shiver all the time.
He took Huck to a lonely place to have a talk with him. It would be some relief to unseal his
tongue for a little while, to divide his burden of distress with another sufferer. Moreover,
he wanted to assure himself that Huck had remained discreet.
Huck, have you ever told anybody about—that?
About what?
You know what?
Oh, course I haven't.
Never a word?
Never a solitary word, so help me. What makes you ask?
Well, I was afeard.
Why, Tom Sawyer, we wouldn't be alive two days if that got found out. You know that.
Tom felt more comfortable.
After a pause.
Huck, they couldn't anybody get you to tell, could they?
Get me to tell? Why, if I wanted that half-breed devil to drown me,
they could get me to tell. They ain't no different way.
Well, that's all right, then. I reckon we're safe as long as we keep Mum.
But let's swear again, anyway. It's more sure.
I'm agreed.
So they swore again, with dread solemnities.
What is the talk around, Huck? I've heard a power of it.
Talk? Well, it's just Muff Potter, Muff Potter, Muff Potter all the time.
It keeps me in a sweat, constant, so as I want to hide somewheres.
That's just the same way they go on round me. I reckon he's a goner.
Don't you feel sorry for him sometimes?
Most always, most always. He ain't no account. But
then he ain't ever done anything to hurt anybody. Just fishes a little,
to get money to get drunk on, and loess around considerable.
But, Lord, we all do that. Least ways most of us. Preachers and such like.
But he's kind of good. He give me half a fish once, when there weren't
enough for two. And lots of times he's kind of stood by me when I was
out of luck. Well, he's mended kites for me, Huck, and knitted hooks
onto my line. I wish we could get him out of there.
My, we couldn't get him out, Tom. And besides, to do any good, they'd
catch him again.
Yes, so they would. But I hate to hear him abuse him so like the
Dickens, when he never done that.
I do too, Tom. Lord, I hear him say he's the bloodiest-looking villain
in this country, and they wonder he wasn't ever hung before. Yes, they
talk like that all the time. I've heard him say that if he was to get
free they'd lynch him. And they do it too.
The boys had a long talk, but it brought them little comfort. As the
twilight drew on, they found themselves hanging about the neighborhood
of the little isolated jail, perhaps with an undefined hope that
something would happen that might clear away their difficulties. But
nothing happened. There seemed to be no angels or fairies interested in
this luckless captive.
The boys did as they had often done before. Went to the cell grating
and gave Potter some tobacco and matches. He was on the ground floor,
and there were no guards. His gratitude for their gifts had always
smote their conscience before. It cut deeper than ever this time. They
felt cowardly and treacherous to the last degree when Potter said,
You've been mighty good to me, boys. Better than anybody else in this
town. And I don't forget it. I don't. Often I says to myself, says I,
I used to mend all the boys' kites and things, and show them where the
good fishing places was, and befriend them when I could. And now
they've all forgot old Muff when he's in trouble. But Tom don't and
Huck don't. They don't forget him, says I, and I don't forget them.
Well, boys, I had done an awful thing. Drunk and crazy at the time.
That's the only way I count for it. And now I got the swing for it,
and it's right. Right and best, too, I reckon. I hope so, anyway.
Well, we won't talk about that. I don't want to make you feel bad.
You've befriended me. But what I want to say is, don't you ever get
drunk. Then you won't ever get here. Stand a little further west. So
that's it. It's a prime comfort to see faces that's friendly when a
body's in such a muck of trouble. And there don't none come here but
yorn. Good friendly faces. Good friendly faces. Get up on one other's
backs, and let me touch them. That's it. Shake hands. Yorn'll come
through the bars, but mine's too big. Little hands and weak. And they've
helped Muff Potter a power, and they'd help him more if they could.
Tom went home miserable, and his dreams that night were full of
horrors. The next day and the day after he hung about the courtroom,
drawn by an impossibly resistible impulse to go in but forcing himself
to stay out. Huck was having the same experience. They studiously
avoided each other. Each wandered away from time to time, but the same
dismal fascination always brought them back presently. Tom kept his
ears open when idlers sauntered out of the courtroom, but invariably
heard distressing news. The toils were closing more and more
relentlessly around poor Potter. At the end of the second day the
village talk was to the effect that Injun Joe's evidence stood firm and
unshaken, and that there was not the slightest question as to what the
jury's verdict would be. Tom was out late that night, and came to bed
through the window. He was in a tremendous state of excitement. It was
hours before he got to sleep. All the village flocked to the courthouse
the next morning, for this was to be the great day. Both sexes were about
equally represented in the packed audience. After a long wait the jury
filed in and took their places. Shortly afterward, Potter, pale and
haggard, timid and hopeless, was brought in with chains upon him, and
seated where all the curious eyes could stare at him. No less
conspicuous was Injun Joe, stolid as ever. There was another pause,
and then the judge arrived and the sheriff proclaimed the opening of
the court. The usual whisperings among the lawyers and gathering
together of papers followed. These details and accompanying delays
worked up an atmosphere of preparation that was as impressive as it was
fascinating. Now a witness was called who testified that he found Muff
Potter washing in the brook at an early hour of the morning that the
murder was discovered, and that he immediately sneaked away. After some
further questioning, counsel for the prosecution said,
"'Take the witness.' The prisoner raised his eyes for a moment, but
dropped them again when his own counsel said,
"'I have no questions to ask him.' The next witness proved the finding
of the knife near the corpse. Counsel for the prosecution said,
"'Take the witness.'
"'I have no questions to ask him,' Potter's lawyer replied. A third
witness swore he had often seen the knife in Potter's possession.
"'Take the witness.' Counsel for Potter declined to question him.
The faces of the audience began to betray annoyance. Did this attorney
mean to throw away his client's life without an effort? Several
witnesses deposed concerning Potter's guilty behavior when brought to
the scene of the murder. They were allowed to leave the stand without
being cross-questioned. Every detail of the damaging circumstances
that occurred in the graveyard upon that morning, which all present
remembered so well, was brought out by credible witnesses, but none of
them were cross-examined by Potter's lawyer. The perplexity and
dissatisfaction of the house expressed itself in murmurs and provoked a
reproof from the bench. Counsel for the prosecution now said,
"'By the oaths of citizens whose simple word is above suspicion, we
have fastened this awful crime, beyond all possibility of question,
upon the unhappy prisoner at the bar. We rest our case here.' A groan
escaped from poor Potter, and he put his face in his hands and rocked
his body softly to and fro, while a painful silence reigned in the
courtroom. Many men were removed, and many women's compassion testified
itself in tears. Counsel for the defense rose and said, "'Your honor,
in our remarks at the opening of this trial we foreshadowed our purpose
to prove that our client did this fearful deed while under the
influence of a blind and irresponsible delirium produced by drink. We
have changed our mind. We shall not offer that plea.' Then to the
clerk, "'Call Thomas Sawyer.' A puzzled amazement awoke in every face
in the house, not even accepting Potter's. Every eye fastened itself
with wondering interest upon Tom as he rose and took his place upon the
stand. The boy looked wild enough, for he was badly scared. The oath
was administered. Thomas Sawyer, where were you on the seventeenth of
June, about the hour of midnight?' Tom glanced at Injun Joe's iron face,
and his tongue failed him. The audience listened breathless, but the
words refused to come. After a few moments, however, the boy got a little
of his strength back, and managed to put enough of it into his voice to
make part of the house hear.
"'In the graveyard?'
"'A little bit louder, please. Don't be afraid. You were in the
graveyard.' A contemptuous smile flitted across Injun Joe's face.
"'Were you anywhere near Horse William's grave?'
"'Yes, sir.'
"'Speak up, just a trifle louder. How near were you?'
"'Near as I am to you.'
"'Were you hidden or not?'
"'I was hid.'
"'Where?'
"'Behind the elms that's on the edge of the grave.'
Injun Joe gave a barely perceptible start.
"'Anyone with you?'
"'Yes, sir. I went there with—'
"'Wait. Wait a moment. Never mind mentioning your companion's name.
We will produce him at the proper time. Did you carry anything there
with you?' Tom hesitated and looked confused.
"'Speak out, my boy. Don't be diffident. The truth is always
respectable. What did you take there?'
"'Only—uh—uh—dead cat.'
There was a ripple of mirth which the court checked.
"'We will produce the skeleton of that cat. Now, my boy, tell us
everything that occurred. Tell it in your own way. Don't skip
anything, and don't be afraid.'
Tom began hesitatingly at first, but as he warmed to his subject his
words flowed more and more easily. In a little while every sound
ceased but his own voice. Every eye fixed itself upon him. With
parted lips and bated breath the audience hung upon his words,
taking no note of time, wrapped in the ghastly fascination of the
tale. The strain upon pent emotion reached its climax when the boys
said, "'And as the doctor fetched the board around and Muff Potter
fell, Injun Joe jumped with a knife and—'
Crash! Quick as lightning the half-breed sprang for a window,
tore his way through all opposers, and was gone.'
XXIV.
Splendid days and fearsome nights.
Tom was a glittering hero once more, the pet of the old, the envy of the young.
His name even went into immortal print, for the village paper magnified
him. There were some that believed he would be president yet, if he
escaped hanging. As usual, the fickle, unreasoning world took Muff Potter
to its bosom, and fondled him as lavishly as it had abused him before.
But that sort of conduct is to the world's credit, therefore it is not
well to find fault with it.
Tom's days were days of splendour and exultation to him, but his nights
were seasons of horror. Injun Joe infested all his dreams, and all was
with doom in his eye. Hardly any temptation could persuade the boy to
stir abroad after nightfall. Poor Huck was in the same state of
wretchedness and terror, for Tom had told the whole story to the lawyer
the night before the great day of the trial, and Huck was sore afraid
that his share in the business might leak out yet, notwithstanding,
Injun Joe's flight had saved him the suffering of testifying in court.
The poor fellow had got the attorney to promise secrecy, but what of
that? Since Tom's harassed conscience had managed to drive him to the
lawyer's house by night and wring a dread tale from lips that had been
sealed with a dismalist and most formidable of oaths, Huck's confidence
in the human race was well nigh obliterated.
Daily Muff Potter's gratitude made Tom glad he had spoken, but nightly
he wished he had sealed up his tongue. Half the time Tom was afraid
Injun Joe would never be captured, the other half he was afraid he
would be. He felt sure he never could draw a safe breath again until
that man was dead and he had seen the corpse. Rewards had been offered,
the country had been scoured, but no Injun Joe was found. One of those
omniscient and awe-inspiring marvels, a detective, came up from St.
Louis, moused around, shook his head, looked wise, and made that sort
of astounding success which members of the craft usually achieve. That
is to say, he found a clue. But you can't hang a clue for murder, and
so after that detective had got through and gone home, Tom felt just as
insecure as he was before.
The slow days drifted on, and each left behind it a slightly lightened
weight of apprehension.
Seeking the Buried Treasure.
There comes a time in every rightly constructed boy's life when he has
a raging desire to go somewhere and dig for hidden treasure. This
desire suddenly came upon Tom one day. He sallied out to find Joe
Harper, but failed of success. Next he sought Ben Rogers. He had gone
fishing. Presently he stumbled upon Huck Finn, the red-handed. Huck
would answer. Tom took him to a private place and opened the matter to
him confidentially. Huck was willing. Huck was always willing to take a
hand in any enterprise that offered entertainment and required no
capital, for he had a troublesome superabundance of that sort of time
which is not money.
"'Where'll we dig?' said Huck.
"'Oh, most anywhere.'
"'Why, is it hid all round?'
"'No, indeed it ain't. It's hid in mighty particular places, Huck,
sometimes on islands, sometimes in rotten chests under the end of a
limb of an old dead tree, just where the shadow falls at midnight, but
mostly under the floor in haunted houses.'
"'Who hides it?'
"'Why, robbers, of course. Who'd you reckon? Sunday-school
superintendents?'
"'I don't know. If it was mine, I wouldn't hide it. I'd spend it and
have a good time.'
"'So would I. But robbers don't do that way. They always hide it and
leave it there. Don't they come after it any more?'
"'No, they think they will, but they generally forget the marks, or
else they die. Anyway, it lays there a long time and gets rusty, and
by-and-by somebody finds an old yellow paper that tells how to find
the marks. A paper that's got to be ciphered over about a week, because
it's mostly signs and hieroglyphics.'
"'Hiro-which?'
"'Hiro-glyphics. Pictures and things, you know, that don't seem to mean
anything.'
"'Have you got one of them papers, Tom?'
"'No.'
"'Well, then how are you going to find the marks?'
"'I don't want to find any marks. They always bury it under a haunted
house or on an island, or under a dead tree that's got one limb
sticking out.'
"'Well, we've tried Jackson's Island a little, and we can try it again
some time. And there's the old haunted house up the still house
branch. And there's lots of dead-limb trees—dead loads of them.'
"'Is it under all of them?'
"'How you talk! No! Then how are you going to know which one to go
for?'
"'Go for all of them.'
"'Why, Tom, it'll take all summer.'
"'Well, what of that? Suppose you find a brass pot with a hundred
dollars in it, all rusty and gay, or a rotten chest full of diamonds.
How's that?'
Huck's eyes glowed.
"'That's bully. Plenty bully enough for me. Just you give me the
hundred dollars, and I don't want no diamonds.'
"'All right. But I bet you I ain't going to throw off on diamonds.
Some of them's worth twenty dollars a piece. There ain't any hardly
but's worth six bits or a dollar.'
"'No.'
"'Is that so? Certainly. Anybody'll tell you so. Ain't you ever seen
one, Huck?'
"'Not as I remember.'
"'Oh, kings have slathers of them.'
"'Well, I don't know no kings, Tom. I reckon you don't. But if you
was to go to Europe, you'd see a raft of them hopping around.'
"'Do they hop?'
"'Hop?'
"'Your granny.'
"'No.'
"'Well, what'd you say they did for?'
"'Shucks, I only meant you'd see him, not hopping, of course. What do
they want to hop for? But I mean you'd just see him scattered round,
you know, in a kind of a general way, like that old hump-backed
Richard.'
"'Richard?'
"'What's his other name?'
"'He didn't have any other name. Kings don't have any but a given
name.'
"'No.'
"'But they don't.'
"'Well, if they like it, Tom, all right. But I don't want to be a king
and have only just a given name, like a nigger. But say, where you
going to dig first?'
"'Well, I don't know. Suppose we tackle that old dead limb-tree on the
hill to the other side of Stillhouse branch.'
"'I'm agreed.'
"'So they got a crippled pick and a shovel, and set out on their three-mile
tramp. They arrived hot and panting, and threw themselves down in the
shade of a neighbouring elm to rest and have a smoke.'
"'I like this,' said Tom.
"'So do I.'
"'Say, Huck, if we find a treasure here, what are you going to do with
your share?'
"'Well, I'll have pie and a glass of soda every day, and I'll go to
every circus that comes along. I bet I'll have a gay time.'
"'Well, ain't you going to save any of it?'
"'Save it? What for?'
"'Why, so as to have something to live on by and by.'
"'Oh, that ain't any use. Pap would come back to this year town some day
and get his claws on it, if I didn't hurry up, and I tell you he'd
clean it out pretty quick. What you going to do with urine, Tom?'
"'I'm going to buy a new drum, and a sure enough sword, and a red
necktie, and a bullpup, and get married.'
"'Married? That's it.'
"'Tom, you—'
"'Why, you ain't in your right mind.'
"'Wait, you'll see.'
"'Well, that's the foolishest thing you could do. Look at Pap and my
mother. Fight! Why, they used to fight all the time. I remember
mighty well.'
"'That ain't anything. The girl I'm going to marry won't fight.'
"'Tom, I reckon they're all alike. They'll all comb a body. Now, you
better think about this awhile. I tell you, you better. What's the
name of the gal?'
"'It ain't a gal at all. It's a girl.'
"'It's all the same, I reckon. Some says gal, some says girl. Both's
right, like enough. Anyway, what's her name, Tom?'
"'I'll tell you some time. Not now.'
"'All right, that'll do. Only if you get married I'll be more
lonesomer than ever.'
"'No, you won't. You'll come and live with me. Now, stir out of this,
and we'll go to digging.'
They worked and sweated for half an hour. No result. They toiled
another half hour. Still no result. Huck said,
"'Do they always bury it as deep as this?'
"'Sometimes. Not always. Not generally. I reckon we haven't got the
right place.'
So they chose a new spot and began again. The labour dragged a
little, but still they made progress. They pegged away in silence for
some time. Finally Huck leaned on his shovel, swabbed the beaded
drops from his brow with his sleeve, and said,
"'Where are you going to dig next after we get this one?'
"'I reckon maybe we'll tackle the old tree that's over yonder on
Cardiff Hill, back of the widows.'
"'I reckon that'll be a good one. But won't the widow take it away
from us, Tom? It's on her land.'
"'She take it away? Maybe she'd like to try it once. Whoever finds one
of these hid treasures, it belongs to him. It don't make any
difference whose land it's on.'
That was satisfactory.
"'The work went on,' by and by Huck said.
"'Blame it. We must be in the wrong place again. What do you think?'
"'It is mighty curious, Huck. I don't understand it. Sometimes
witches interfere. I reckon maybe that's what's the trouble now.'
"'Shucks, witches ain't got no power in the daytime.'
"'Well, that's so. I didn't think of that. Oh, I know what the matter
is. What a blamed lot of fools we are. You got to find out where the
shadow of the limb falls at midnight, and that's where you dig.'
"'Then con sound it. We fooled away all this work for nothing. Now
hang it all, we've got to come back in the night. It's an awful long
way. Can you get out?'
"'I bet I will. We've got to do it to-night, too, because if somebody
sees these holes, they'll know in a minute what's here, and they'll go
for it.'
"'Well, I'll come around and mow to-night.'
"'All right. Let's hide the tools in the bushes.'
The boys were there that night about the appointed time. They sat in
the shadow waiting. It was a lonely place, and an hour made solemn by
old traditions. Spirits whispered in the rustling leaves, ghosts lurked
in the murky nooks, the deep baying of a hound floated up out of the
distance. An owl answered with his sepulchral note. The boys were
subdued by these solemnities, and talked little. By-and-by they judged
that twelve had come, they marked where the shadow fell, and began to
dig. Their hopes commenced to rise, their interests grew stronger, and
their industry kept pace with it. The hole deepened, and still deepened.
But every time their hearts jumped to hear the pick strike upon
something, they only suffered a new disappointment. It was only a stone
or a chunk. At last Tom said,
"'It ain't no use, Huck. We're wrong again.'
"'Well, but we can't be wrong. We spotted the shatter to a dot.'
"'I know it. But then there's another thing.'
"'What's that?'
"'Why, we only guessed at the time. Like enough it was too late or too
early.'
Huck dropped his shovel.
"'That's it,' he said.
"'That's the very trouble. We've got to give this one up. We can't ever
tell the right time. And besides, this kind of thing's too awful. Here
are this time of night with witches and ghosts a-fluttering around, so
I feel as if something's behind me all the time, and I'm a-fear to turn
around, because maybe there's others in front of waiting for a chance.
I've been creeping all over ever since I got here.'
"'Well, I've been pretty much so too, Huck. They most always put in a
dead man when they bury a treasure under a tree to look out for it.'
"'Lordy!'
"'Yes, they do. I've always heard that.'
"'Tom, I don't like to fool around much where there's dead people. A
body's bound to get into trouble with them, sure.'
"'I don't like to stir them up, either. Suppose this one here was to
stick his skull out and say something.'
"'Don't, Tom, it's awful.'
"'Well, it just is. Huck, I don't feel comfortable a bit.'
"'Say, Tom, let's give this place up and try somewhere else.'
"'All right, I reckon we'd better.'
"'What'll it be?'
Tom considered a while, and then said,
"'The Hanted House, that's it.'
"'Blame it, I don't like Hanted Houses, Tom. Why, they're a darn sight
worse than dead people. Dead people might talk, maybe, but they don't
come sliding round in a shroud when you ain't noticing, and peep over
your shoulder all of a sudden and grit their teeth the way a ghost
does. I couldn't stand such a thing as that, Tom. Nobody could.'
"'Yes, but, Huck, ghosts don't travel around only at night. They won't
hinder us from digging there in the daytime.'
"'Well, that's so. But you know mighty well people don't go about
that Hanted House in the day, nor the night.'
"'Well, that's mostly because they don't like to go where a man's been
murdered, anyway. But nothing's ever been seen around that house,
except in the night. Just some blue lights slipping by the windows. No
regular ghosts.'
"'Well, where you see one of them blue lights flickering around, Tom,
you can bet there's a ghost mighty close behind it. It stands to
reason. Because you know that they don't anybody but ghosts use them.'
"'Yes, that's so. But anyway, they don't come round in the daytime. So
what's the use of our being afeard?'
"'Well, all right. We'll tackle the Hanted House, if you say so. But I
reckon it's taken chances.'
They had started down the hill by this time. There, in the middle of
the moonlit valley below them, stood the Hanted House, utterly
isolated, its fences gone long ago, rank weeds smothering the very
doorsteps, the chimney crumpled to ruin, the window sashes vacant, a
corner of the roof caved in, the boys gazed awhile, half expecting to
see a blue light flit past a window. Then, talking in a low tone, as
befitted the time and the circumstances, they struck far off to the
right, to give the Hanted House a wide berth, and took their way
homeward through the woods that adorned the rearward side of Cardiff
Hill.
XXVI.
Real robbers seize the box of gold.
About noon the next day the boys arrived at the dead tree. They had come for their tools.
Tom was impatient to go to the haunted house. Huck was measurably so, also, but suddenly said,
"'Looky here, Tom, do you know what day it is?' Tom mentally ran over the days of the week,
and then quickly lifted his eyes with a startled look in them.
"'My! I never once thought of it, Huck!'
Well, I didn't either, but all at once it popped on to me that it was Friday.
Blame me! A body can't be too careful, Huck. We might have got into an awful scrape
tackling such a thing on a Friday. Might. Better say we would. There's some lucky days,
maybe, but Friday ain't. Any fool knows that. I don't reckon you was the first that found it out,
Huck. Well, I never said it was, did I? And Friday ain't all, neither. I had a rotten bad
dream last night, dreamt about rats. No! Sure sign of trouble. Did they fight? No. Well,
that's good, Huck. When they don't fight, it's only a sign that there's trouble around,
you know. All we got to do is to look mighty sharp and keep out of it. We'll drop this thing
for today and play. Do you know Robin Hood, Huck? No. Who's Robin Hood?'
"'Why, he was one of the greatest men that was ever in England, and the best.
He was a robber.' Cracky, I wished I was. Who did he rob? Only sheriffs and bishops and rich
people and kings and such like. But he never bothered the poor. He loved them. He always
divided up with them perfectly square. Well, he must have been a brick. I bet you he was,
Huck. Oh, he was the noblest man that ever was. There ain't any such men now, I can tell you.
He could lick any man in England with one hand tied behind him, and he could take his u-bow and
plug a ten-cent piece every time a mile and a half. What's a u-bow? I don't know. It's some
kind of a bow, of course, and if he hit that dime only on the edge, he would sit down and cry and
curse. But we'll play Robin Hood, and it's knobby fun. I'll learn you.'
"'I'm agreed.' So they played Robin Hood all afternoon, now and then casting a yearning eye
down upon the haunted house and passing a remark about the morrow's prospects and possibilities
as the sun began to sink into the west, they took their way homeward to thwart the long shadows of
the trees, and soon were buried from sight in the forests of Cardiff Hill. On Saturday, shortly
afternoon, the boys were at the dead tree again. They had a smoke and a chat in the shade, and then
dug a little in their last hole, not with great hope, but merely because Tom said there were
so many cases where people had given up a treasure after getting down within six inches of it,
and then somebody else had come along and turned it up with a single thrust of a shovel. The thing
failed this time, however, so the boys shouldered their tools and went away feeling that they had
not trifled with fortune, but had fulfilled all the requirements that belonged to the business
of treasure-hunting. When they reached the haunted house there was something so weird and grisly
about the dead silence that reigned there under the baking sun, and something so depressing about
the loneliness and desolation of the place that they were afraid, for a moment, to venture in.
Then they crept to the door and took a trembling peep. They saw a weed-grown,
floorless room, unplastered, an ancient fireplace, vacant windows, a ruinous staircase,
and here, there, and everywhere hung ragged and abandoned cobwebs. They presently entered,
softly, with quickened pulses, talking in whispers, ears alert to catch the slightest sound,
and muscles tense and ready for instant retreat. In a little while familiarity modified their
fears, and they gave the place a critical and interested examination, rather admiring their
own boldness and wondering at it, too. Next, they wanted to look upstairs. This was something like
cutting off the retreat. But they got to daring each other, and of course there could be but
one result. They threw their tools into a corner and made the ascent. Up there were the same signs
of decay. In one corner they found a closet that promised mystery, but the promise was a fraud—there
was nothing in it. Their courage was up now, and well in hand. They were about to go down and begin
work when—
"'Shh!' said Tom.
"'What is it?' whispered Huck, blanching with fright. "'Shh! There! Hear it? Yes! Oh my! Let's
run! Keep still! Don't you budge! They're coming right toward the door!'
The boys stretched themselves upon the floor with their eyes to knotholes in the planking,
and lay waiting in a misery of fear.
"'They've stopped! No! Coming! Here they are! Don't whisper another word, Huck! My goodness,
I wish I was out of this!'
Two men entered. Each boy said to himself,
"'There's the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's been about town once or twice lately.
Never saw Totherman before.'
Tother was a ragged, unkempt creature, with nothing very pleasant in his face. The Spaniard
wrapped in a sarape. He had bushy white whiskers, long white hair flowed from under his sombrero,
and he wore green goggles. When they came in, Tother was talking in a low voice. They
sat down on the ground, facing the door, with their backs to the wall, and the speaker continued
his remarks. His manner became less guarded and his words more distinct as he proceeded.
"'No,' said he, "'I've thought it all over, and I don't like it. It's dangerous.'
"'Dangerous!' grunted the deaf and dumb Spaniard, to the vast surprise of the boys.
"'Milksop!' This voice made the boys gasp and quake. It was Injun Joe's. There was silence
for some time. Then Joe said, "'What's any more dangerous than that job up yonder?
But nothing's come of it.'
"'That's different. Away up the river so, and not another house about.
Don't ever be known that we tried, anyway, long as we didn't succeed.'
"'Well, what's more dangerous than coming here in the daytime? Anybody would
suspicion us that saw us.'
"'I know that. But there weren't any other places handy after that fool of a job. I
want to quit this shanty. I wanted to yesterday, only it weren't any use
trying to stir out of here with those infernal boys playing over there on
the hill right in full view.'
Those infernal boys quaked again under the inspiration of this remark,
and thought how lucky it was that they had remembered it was Friday and
concluded to wait a day. They wished in their hearts they had waited a
year. The two men got out some food and made a luncheon. After a long and
thoughtful silence, Injun Joe said,
"'Look here, lad. You go back up the river where you belong. Wait there
till you hear from me. I'll take the chances on dropping into this town
just once more for a look. We'll do that dangerous job after I've spied
around a little and think things look well for it. Then for Texas. We'll
leg it together.'
This was satisfactory. Both men presently fell to yawning, and Injun Joe
said,
"'I'm dead for sleep. It's your turn to watch.' He curled down into the
weeds, and soon began to snore. His comrade stirred him once or twice, and
he became quiet. Presently the watcher began to nod. His head drooped
lower and lower, and both men began to snore now.
The boys drew a long, grateful breath. Tom whispered,
"'Now's our chance. Come.'
Huck said,
"'I can't. I'd die if they whisked awake.'
Tom urged. Huck held back. At last Tom rose slowly and softly and
started alone. But the first step he made rung such a hideous creek from
the crazy floor that he sank down almost dead with fright. He never made
a second attempt. The boys lay there counting the dragging moments till
it seemed to them that time must be done, and eternity growing gray.
And then they were grateful to note that at last the sun was setting.
Now one snore ceased. Injun Joe sat up, stared around, smiled grimly upon
his comrade, whose head was drooping upon his knees, stirred him up with
his foot, and said,
"'Here! You're a watchman, ain't you? All right, though. Nothing's
happened.'
My! Have I been asleep? Oh, partly, partly. Nearly time for us to be
moving, pard. What'll we do with what little swag we've got left? I
don't know. Leave it here as we've always done, I reckon. No use to
take it away till we start south. Six hundred and fifty and silver's
something to carry. Well, all right, it won't matter to come here once
more. No, but I'd say come in the night as we used to do. It's better.
Yes, but look here. It may be a good while before I get the right chance
at that job. Accidents might happen. Taintin's such a very good place.
We'll just regularly bury it, and bury it deep.'
"'Good idea,' said the comrade, who walked across the room, knelt down,
raised one of the rearward hearth-stones, and took out a bag that
jingled pleasantly. He subtracted from it twenty or thirty dollars for
himself, and as much for Injun Joe, and passed the bag to the latter,
who was on his knees in the corner now, digging with his bowie-knife.
The boys forgot all their fears, all their miseries in an instant. With
gloating eyes they watched every movement. Luck! The splendor of it was
beyond all imagination. Six hundred dollars was money enough to make
half a dozen boys rich. Here was treasure hunting under the happiest
auspices. There would not be any bothersome uncertainty as to where to
dig. They nudged each other every moment, eloquent nudges, and easily
understood, for they simply meant, "'Oh, but ain't you glad now we're
here!' Joe's knife struck upon something.
"'Hullo,' he said.
"'What is it?' said his comrade.
"'Half rotten plank. No, it's a box, I believe. Here, bear a hand, and
we'll see what it's here for. Never mind, I've broke a hole.' He
reached his hand in, and drew it out.
"'Man, it's money!'
The two men examined the handful of coins. They were gold. The boys
above were as excited as themselves, and as delighted. Joe's comrade
said, "'We'll make quick work of this. There's an old rusty pick over
amongst the weeds in the corner, the other side of the fireplace. I saw
it a minute ago.' He ran and brought the boys' pick and shovel. Injun
Joe took the pick, looked it over critically, shook his head, muttered
something to himself, and then began to use it. The box was soon
unearthed. It was not very large. It was iron-bound, and had been very
strong before the slow years had injured it. The men contemplated the
treasure a while, in blissful silence.
"'Pard, there's thousands of dollars here,' said Injun Joe.
"'Twas always said that Murrell's gang used to be around here one
summer,' the stranger observed.
"'I know it,' said Injun Joe. And this looks like it, I should say.
"'Now you won't need to do that job.'
The half-breed frowned, said he.
"'You don't know me. Least you don't know all about that thing. Taint
robbery altogether. It's revenge.' And a wicked light flamed in his
eyes. I'll need your help in it. When it's finished, then Texas. Go
home to your nance and your kids, and stand by till you hear from me.'
"'Well, if you say so. What'll we do with this? Bury it again?'
"'Yes,' ravishing delight overhead.
"'No, by the great Sackham, no!' profound distress overhead. I'd nearly
forgot. That pick had fresh earth on it.' The boys were sick with terror
in a moment. What business has a pick and a shovel here? What business
with fresh earth on them? Who brought them here? And where are they
gone? Have you heard anybody? Seen anybody? What, bury it again and
leave them to come and see the ground disturbed? Not exactly. Not
exactly. We'll take it to my den.'
"'Why, of course. Might have thought of that before. You mean number
No. Number two, under the cross. The other place is bad. Too common.'
"'All right. It's nearly dark enough to start.'
Injun Joe got up and went about from window to window, cautiously
peeping out. Presently he said,
"'Who could have brought those tools here? Do you reckon they can be
upstairs?'
The boys' breath forsook them. Injun Joe put his hand on his knife,
halted a moment, undecided, and then turned toward the stairway. The
boys thought of the closet, but their strength was gone. The steps
came creaking up the stairs. The intolerable distress of the situation
woke the stricken resolution of the lads. They were about to spring for
the closet, when there was a crash of rotten timbers and Joe landed on
the ground amid debris of the ruined stairway. He gathered himself up,
cursing, and his comrades said,
"'Now what's the use of all that? If it's anybody and they're up there,
let them stay there. Who cares? If they want to jump down now and get
into trouble, who objects? It will be dark in fifteen minutes. And
then let them follow us if they want to. I'm willing. In my opinion,
whoever hoved those things in here caught a sight of us and took us for
ghosts or devils or something. I'll bet they're running yet.'
Joe grumbled a while. Then he agreed with his friend that what
daylight was left ought to be economized in getting things ready for
leaving. Shortly afterward they slipped out of the house in the
deepening twilight and moved towards the river with their precious
gold box. Tom and Huck rose up, weak but vastly relieved, and stared
after them through the chinks between the logs of the house. Follow?
Not they. They were content to reach ground again without broken necks
and take the townward track over the hill. They did not talk much. They
were too much absorbed in hating themselves, hating the ill luck that
made them take the spade and the pick there. But for that Injun Joe
never would have suspected. He would have hidden the silver with the
gold to wait there till his revenge was satisfied, and then he would
have had the misfortune to find that money turn up missing. Bitter,
bitter luck that the tools were ever brought there. They resolved to
keep a look out for that Spaniard, when he should come to town spying
out for chances to do his revengeful job, and follow him to Number Two,
wherever that might be. Then a ghastly thought occurred to Tom.
Revenge? What if he means us, Huck? Oh, don't, said Huck, nearly
fainting. They talked it all over, and as they entered town they agreed
to believe that he might possibly mean somebody else, at least that he
might at least mean nobody but Tom, since only Tom had testified. Very,
very small comfort it was to Tom to be alone in danger. Company would be
palpable improvement, he thought.
XXVII. Trembling on the Trail.
The adventure of the day mightily tormented Tom's dreams that night. Four times he had
his hands on that rich treasure, and four times it wasted to nothingness in his fingers,
as sleep forsook him, and wakefulness brought back the hard reality of his misfortune.
As he lay in the early morning recalling the incidents of his great adventure, he noticed
that they seemed curiously subdued and far away, somewhat as if they had happened in
another world, or in a time long gone by. Then it occurred to him that the great adventure
must be a dream. There was one very strong argument in favour of this idea, namely, that
the quantity of coin he had seen was too vast to be real. He had never seen as much as fifty
dollars in one mass before, and he was like all boys of his age and stationed in life,
in that he imagined that all references to hundreds and thousands were mere fanciful
forms of speech, and that no such sums really existed in the world. He never had supposed
for a moment that so large a sum as a hundred dollars was to be found in actual money in
any one's possession. If his notions of hidden treasure had been analysed, they would have
been found to consist of a handful of real dimes and a bushel of vague, splendid, ungraspable
dollars.
But the incidents of his adventure grew sensibly sharper and clearer under the attrition of
thinking them over, and so he presently found himself leaning to the impression that the
might not have been a dream, after all. This uncertainty must be swept away. He would snatch
a hurried breakfast and go and find Huck.
Huck was sitting on the gunnel of a flatboat, listlessly dangling his feet in the water
and looking very melancholy. Tom concluded to let Huck lead up to the subject. If he
did not do it, then the adventure would be proved to have been only a dream.
Hello, Huck.
Hello, yourself.
Silence for a minute.
Tom, if we'd left the blamed tools at the dead tree, we'd have got the money. Oh, ain't
it awful!
Taint a dream, then! Taint a dream! Somehow I most wish it was. Dogged if I don't, Huck.
What ain't a dream?
Oh, that thing yesterday! I'd been half-thinking it was. Dream! If them stairs hadn't broke
down, you'd have seen how much dream it was. I've had dreams enough all night, with that
patch-eyed Spanish devil going for me all through him. Rot him!
No, not rot him! Find him! Track the money! Tom, we'll never find him. A feller don't
have only one chance for such a pile, and that one's lost. I'd feel mighty shaky if
I was to see him, anyway.
Well, so'd I. But I'd like to see him anyway. Track him out. To his number two.
Number two, yes, that's it. I've been thinking about that. But I can't make nothing out
of it. What do you reckon it is?
I don't know. It's too deep.
Say, Huck, maybe it's the number of a house.
Goodie! No, Tom, that ain't it. If it is, it ain't in this one-horse town. There ain't
no numbers here.
Well, that's so. Let me think a minute. Here, it's the number of a room, in a tavern, you
know.
Oh, that's the trick. There ain't only two taverns. We can find out quick. You stay here,
Huck, till I come.
Tom was off at once. He did not care to have Huck's company in public places. He was gone
half an hour. He found that in the best tavern, number two had long been occupied by a young
lawyer and was still so occupied. In the less ostentatious house, number two was a mystery.
The tavern keeper's young son said it was kept locked all the time, and he never saw
anybody go into it or come out of it except at night. He did not know any particular reason
for this state of things, had had some little curiosity, but it was rather feeble, had made
the most of the mystery by entertaining himself with the idea that the room was haunted, had
noticed that there was a light in there the night before.
That's what I've found out, Huck. I reckon that's the very number two we're after.
I reckon it is, Tom. Now, what you going to do?
Let me think.
Tom thought a long time. Then he said,
I'll tell you. The back door of that number two is the door that comes out into the little
close alley between the tavern and the old rattle-trap of a brick store. Now, you get
hold of all the door-keys you can find, and I'll nip all of Anty's, and the first dark
night we'll go there and try him. And mind you, keep a look out for Injun Joe, because
he said he was going to drop into town and spy around once more for a chance to get his
revenge. If you see him, you just follow him, and if he don't go to that number two, that
ain't the place.
Lordy, I don't want to follow him by myself.
Why, it'll be a night, sure. He might never see you. And if he did, maybe he'd never think
anything.
Well, if it's pretty dark, I reckon I'll track him.
I don't know. I don't know.
I'll try.
You bet I'll follow him, if it's dark, Huck. Why, he might have found out that you couldn't
get his revenge and be going right after that money.
It's so, Tom, it's so. I'll follow him. I will, by jingos.
Now you're talking! Don't you ever weaken Huck, and I won't.
In the lair of Injun Joe.
That night Tom and Huck were ready for their adventure. They hung about the neighborhood
of the tavern until after nine, one watching the alley at a distance, and the other the
door. Nobody entered the alley or left it. Nobody resembling the Spaniard entered or
left the tavern door. The night promised to be a fair one, so Tom went home with the understanding
that if a considerable degree of darkness came on, Huck was to come and mow, whereupon
he would slip out and try the keys. But the night remained clear, and Huck closed his
watch and retired to bed in an empty sugar hog's head about twelve.
Tuesday the boys had the same ill luck. Also Wednesday. But Thursday night promised better.
Tom slipped out in good season with his aunt's old tin lantern and a large towel to blindfold
it with. He hid the lantern in Huck's sugar hog's head, and the watch began. An hour before
midnight the tavern closed up, and its lights, the only ones thereabouts, were put out.
No Spaniard had been seen. Nobody entered or left the alley. Everything was auspicious.
The blackness of darkness reigned. The perfect stillness was interrupted only by occasional
mutterings of distant thunder. Tom got his lantern, lit it in the hog's head, wrapped
it closely in the towel, and the two adventurers crept in the gloom toward the tavern. Huck
stood sentry, and Tom felt his way into the alley. Then there was a season of waiting
anxiety that weighed upon Huck's spirits like a mountain. He began to wish he could
a flash from the lantern. It would frighten him, but it would at least tell him that Tom
was alive yet. It seemed hours since Tom had disappeared. Surely he must have fainted.
Maybe he was dead. Maybe his heart had burst under terror and excitement. In his uneasiness
Huck found himself drawing closer and closer to the alley, fearing all sorts of dreadful
things and momentarily expecting some catastrophe to happen that would take away his breath.
There was not much to take away, for he seemed only able to inhale it by thimble-fuls, and
his heart would soon wear itself out the way it was beating. Suddenly there was a flash
of light and Tom came tearing by him.
"'Run!' said he. "'Run for your life!'
He needn't have repeated it. Once was enough. Huck was making thirty or forty miles an hour
before the repetition was uttered. The boys never stopped till they reached the shed of
a deserted slaughter-house at the lower end of the village. Just as they got within its
shelter the storm burst and the rain poured down. As soon as Tom got his breath he said,
"'Huck, it was awful! I tried two of the keys, just as soft as I could, but they seemed to
make such a power of a racket that I couldn't hardly get my breath, I was so scared. They
wouldn't turn in the lock either. Well, without noticing what I was doing, I took hold of
the knob and open comes the door. It warn't locked. I hopped in and shook off the towel
and—'Great Caesar's Ghost!'
"'What? What you see, Tom?'
"'Huck, I most stepped on to Injun Joe's hand.'
"'No.'
"'Yes. He was laying there, sound asleep on the floor, with his old patch on his eye and
his arms spread out. Lordy, what did you do? Did he wake up?'
"'No, never budged. Drunk, I reckon. I just grabbed that towel and started.'
"'I'd never thought of the towel, I bet.'
"'Well, I would. My aunt would make me mighty sick if I lost it.'
"'Say, Tom, did you see that box?'
"'Huck, I didn't wait to look around. I didn't see the box, I didn't see the cross. I didn't
see anything but a bottle and a tin cup on the floor by Injun Joe. Yes, and I saw two
barrels and lots more bottles in the room.'
"'Don't you see, now? What's the matter with that haunted room?'
"'How?'
"'Why, it's haunted with whiskey. Maybe all the Temperance Taverns have got a haunted
room, hey, Huck?'
"'Well, I reckon maybe that's so. Who'd a thought such a thing. But say, Tom, now's
a mighty good time to get that box if Injun Joe's drunk.'
"'It is that. You try it.' Huck shuddered.
"'Well, no, I reckon not.'
"'And I reckon not, Huck. Only one bottle alongside of Injun Joe ain't enough. If there'd
been three, he'd be drunk enough and I'd do it.' There was a long pause for reflection,
and then Tom said,
"'Looky here, Huck, let's not try that thing any more till we know Injun Joe's not in there.
It's too scary. Now, if we watch every night, we'll be dead sure to see him go out, some
time or other, and then we'll snatch that box quicker in lightning.'
"'Well, I'm agreed. I'll watch the whole night long, and I'll do it every night, too, if
you'll do the other part of the job.'
"'All right, I will. All you got to do is to trot up Hooper Street a block and mow,
and if I'm asleep, you throw some gravel at the window and that'll fetch me.'
"'Agreed. And good as wheat.'
"'Now, Huck, the storm's over and I'll go home. It'll begin to be daylight in a couple
hours. You go back and watch that long, will you?'
"'I said I would, Tom, and I will. I'll hant that tavern every night for a year. I'll sleep
all day and I'll stand watch all night.'
"'That's all right. Now, where are you going to sleep?'
In Ben Rogers' hayloft. He lets me, and so does his pap's nigger man, Uncle Jake. I tote
water for Uncle Jake whenever he wants me to, and any time I ask him he gives me a little
something to eat if he can spare it. That's a mighty good nigger, Tom. He likes me, because
I don't ever act as if I was above him. Sometimes I sit right down and eat with him. But you
needn't tell that. A body's got to do things when he's awful hungry he wouldn't want to
do as a steady thing. Well, if I don't want you in the daytime, I'll let you sleep. I
won't come bothering round. Any time you see something's up in the night, just skip right
around and mow.'
XXIX. Huck Saves the Widow.
The first thing Tom heard on Friday morning was a glad piece of news. Judge Thatcher's
family had come back to town the night before. Both Inge and Joe and the treasurer sank
into secondary importance for a moment, and Becky took the chief place in the boy's interest.
He saw her, and they had an exhausting good time playing High Spy and Gully Keeper with
a crowd of their schoolmates. The day was completed and crowned in a peculiarly satisfactory
way. Becky teased her mother to appoint the next day for the long-promised and long-delayed
picnic, and she consented. The child's delight was boundless, and Tom's not more moderate.
The invitations were sent out before sunset, and straightway the young folks of the village
were thrown into a fever of preparation and pleasurable anticipation. Tom's excitement
enabled him to keep awake until a pretty late hour, and he had good hopes of hearing Huck's
and of having his treasure to astonish Becky and the picnickers with next day. But he was
disappointed. No signal came that night. Morning came, eventually, and by ten or eleven o'clock
a giddy and rollicking company were gathered at Judge Thatcher's, and everything was ready
for a start. It was not the custom for elderly people to mar picnics with their presence.
The children were considered safe enough under the wings of a few young ladies of eighteen,
and a few young gentlemen of twenty-three or thereabouts. The old steam ferry-boat
was chartered for the occasion. Presently the gay throng filed up the main street laden
with provision baskets. Sid was sick, and had to miss the fun. Mary remained at home
to entertain him. The last thing Mrs. Thatcher said to Becky was,
"'You'll not get back till late. Perhaps you'd better stay all night with some of the girls
that live near the ferry landing, child.'
"'Then I'll stay with Susy Harper, Mama.'
"'Very well. And mind and behave yourself, and don't be any trouble.'
Presently, as they tripped along, Tom said to Becky,
"'Say, I'll tell you what we'll do. Instead of going to Joe Harper's, we'll climb right
up the hill and stop at the Widow Douglas's. She'll have ice cream—she has it most every
day—dead loads of it—and she'll be awful glad to have us.'
"'Oh, that will be fun!'
Then Becky reflected a moment and said,
"'But what will Mama say?'
"'All she'll ever know.'
The girl turned the idea over in her mind, and said reluctantly,
"'I reckon it's wrong, but—'
"'But, shucks, your mother won't know, and so what's the harm? All she wants is that
you'll be safe. And I bet you she'd have said, Go there, if she'd a thought about it. I know
she would.'
The Widow Douglas's splendid hospitality was a tempting bait. It and Tom's persuasions
presently carried the day, so it was decided to say nothing to anybody about the night's
program. Presently it occurred to Tom that maybe Huck might come in this very night and
give the signal. The thought took a deal of the spirit out of his anticipation. Still,
he could not bear to give up the fun at Widow Douglas's. And why should he give it up, he
reasoned? The signal did not come the night before, so why should it be any more likely
to come to-night? The sure fun of the evening outweighed the uncertain treasure, and, boylike,
he determined to yield to the stronger inclination and not allow himself to think of the box
of money another time that day.
Three miles below town the ferry-boat stopped at the mouth of the woody hollow and tied
up. The crowd swarmed ashore, and soon the forest distances and craggy heights echoed
far and near with shoutings and laughter. All the different ways of getting hot and tired
with, and by and by the rovers straggled back to camp, fortified with responsible appetites,
and then the destruction of the good things began. After the feast there was a refreshing
season of rest and chat in the shade of spreading oaks. By and by somebody shouted,
"'Who's ready for the cave?'
"'Everybody was.' Bundles of candles were procured, and straight away there was a general
scamper up the hill. The mouth of the cave was up the hillside, an opening shaped like
the letter A. Its massive oaken door stood unbarred. Within was a small chamber, chilly
as an ice-house, and walled by nature with solid limestone that was dewy with a cold
sweat. It was romantic and mysterious to stand here in the deep gloom and look out upon the
green valley shining in the sun. But the impressiveness of the situation quickly wore off, and the
romping began again. The moment a candle was lighted there was a general rush upon the
owner of it. A struggle and a gallant defence followed, but the candle was soon knocked
down or blown out, and then there was a glad clamour of laughter and a new chase. But all
things have an end. By and by the procession went filing down the steep descent of the
main avenue, the flickering rank of lights dimly revealing the lofty walls of rock almost
to their point of junction sixty feet overhead. This main avenue was not more than eight or
ten feet wide. Every few steps other lofty and still narrower crevices branched from
it on either hand, for MacDougall's cave was but a vast labyrinth of crooked aisles that
ran into each other and out again and led nowhere. It was said that one might wander
days and nights together through its intricate tangle of rifts and chasms, and never find
the end of the cave, and that he might go down and down and still down into the earth,
and it was just the same—labyrinth, underneath labyrinth, and no end to any of them. No man
knew the cave. That was an impossible thing. Most of the young men knew a portion of it,
and it was not customary to venture much beyond this known portion. Tom Sawyer knew as much
of the cave as any one. The procession moved along the main avenue some three quarters
of a mile, then groups and couples began to slip aside into branch avenues, fly along
the dismal corridors, and take each other by surprise at points where the corridors
joined again. Parties were able to elude each other for the space of half an hour without
going beyond the known ground. By and by one group after another came straggling back to
the mouth of the cave, panting, hilarious, smeared from head to foot with tallow-drippings,
daubed with clay, and entirely delighted with the success of the day. Then they were astonished
that they had been taking no note of time, and that night was about at hand. The clanging
bell had been calling for half an hour. However, this sort of close to the day's adventures
was romantic and therefore satisfactory. When the ferry-boat with her wild freight pushed
into the stream, nobody cared sixpence for the wasted time but the captain of the craft.
Huck was already upon his watch when the ferry-boat's lights went glinting past the wharf. He heard
no noise on board, for the young people were as subdued and still as people usually are
who were nearly tired to death. He wondered what boat it was, and why she did not stop
at the wharf, and then he dropped her out of his mind and put his attention upon his
business. The night was growing cloudy and dark. Ten o'clock came, and the noise of the
vehicle ceased. Scattered lights began to wink out. All straggling foot-passengers disappeared.
The village betook itself to its slumbers and left the small watcher alone with the
silence and the ghosts. Eleven o'clock came, and the tavern lights were put out. Darkness
everywhere now. Huck waited what seemed a weary long time, but nothing happened. His
faith was weakening. Was there any use? Was there really any use? Why not give it up and
turn in?
A noise fell upon his ear. He was all attention in an instant. The alley-door closed softly.
He sprang to the corner of the brick-store. The next moment two men brushed by him, and
one seemed to have something under his arm. It must be that box. So they were going to
remove the treasurer. Why call Tom now? It would be absurd. The men would get away with
the box and never be found again. No, he would stick to their wake and follow them. He would
trust to the darkness for security from discovery. So communing with himself, Huck stepped out
and glided along behind the men, cat-like, with bare feet, allowing them to keep just
far enough ahead not to be invisible. They moved up the river-street three blocks, then
turned to the left up a cross-street. They went straight ahead, then, until they came
to the path that led up Cardiff Hill. This they took. They passed by the old Welshman's
house, half-way up the hill, without hesitating, and still climbed upward. Good thought, Huck!
They will bury it in the old quarry. But they never stopped at the quarry. They passed on
up the summit. They plunged into the narrow path between the tall Sumac bushes and were
at once hidden in the gloom.
Huck closed up and shortened his distance now, for they would never be able to see him.
He trotted along a while, then slackened his pace, fearing he was gaining too fast, moved
on apiece, then stopped altogether, listened. No sound. None, save that he seemed to hear
the beating of his own heart. The hooting of an owl came from over the hill. Ominous
sound! But no footsteps. Heavens! Was everything lost? He was about to spring with winged feet
when a man cleared his throat not four feet from him.
Huck's heart shot into his throat, but he swallowed it again, and then he stood there,
shaking as if a dozen agues had taken charge of him at once, and so weak that he thought
he must surely fall to the ground. He knew where he was. He knew he was within five steps
of the stile leading into Widow Douglas's grounds. Very well, he thought, let them bury
it there. It won't be hard to find.
Now there was a voice, a very low voice, Injun Joe's.
Damn her! Maybe she's got company. There's lights, late as it is.
I can't see any. This was that stranger's voice, the stranger of the haunted house.
A deadly chill went to Huck's heart. This, then, was the revenge job. His thought was
to fly. Then he remembered that the Widow Douglas had been kind to him more than once,
and maybe these men were going to murder her. He wished he dared venture to warn her, but
he knew he didn't dare. They might come and catch him. He thought all this and more in
the moment that the lapse between the stranger's remark and Injun Joe's next, which was,
"'Because the bush is in your way. Now this way. Now you see, don't you?'
"'Yes. Well, there is company there, I reckon. Better give it up.'
"'Give it up? And I just leaving this country forever? Give it up, and maybe never have
another chance? I tell you again, as I've told you before, I don't care for her swag.
You may have it. But her husband was rough on me. Many times he was rough on me. And
mainly he was the justice of the peace that jugged me for a vagrant. And that ain't all.
It ain't a millionth part of it. He had me horse-whipped. Horse-whipped in front of the
jail, like a nigger, with all the town looking on. Horse-whipped, do you understand? He took
advantage of me and died, but I'll take it out of her.'
"'Oh, don't kill her. Don't do that. Kill? Who said anything about killing? I would kill
him if he were here, but not her. When you want to get revenge on a woman, you don't
kill her. Bosh, you go for her looks. You slit her nostrils. You knot your ears, like
a sow. By God, that's—'
"'Keep your opinion to yourself. It will be safest for you. I'll tie her to the bed.
If she bleeds to death, is that my fault? I'll not cry if she does. My friend, you'll
get help in this thing, for my sake. That's why you're here. I mightn't be able to loan.
If you flinch, I'll kill you. Do you understand that? And if I have to kill you, I'll kill
her. And then I reckon nobody'll ever know much about who done this business. Well, if
it's got to be done, let's get at it. The quicker the better. I'm all in a shiver. Do
it now? And company there? Look here, I'll get suspicious of you. First thing you know—no,
we'll wait till the lights are out. There's no hurry."
Huck felt that a silence was going to ensue—a thing still more awful than any amount of
murderous talk. So he held his breath and stepped gingerly back, planted his foot carefully
and firmly, after balancing, one-legged, in a precarious way, and almost toppling over,
first on one side and then on the other. He took another step back, with the same elaboration
and the same risks, then another and another, and—a twig snapped under his foot. His breath
stopped when he listened. There was no sound. The stillness was perfect. His gratitude was
measureless. Now he turned in his tracks, between the walls of sumac bushes, turned
himself as carefully as if he were a ship, and then stepped quickly but cautiously along.
When he emerged at the quarry he felt secure, and so he picked up his nimble heels and flew,
down, down he sped till he reached the Welshman's. He banged at the door, and presently the
heads of the old man and his two stalwart sons were thrust from the windows.
"'What's the row there? Who's banging? What do you want?'
"'Let me in, quick! I'll tell everything.'
"'Why, who are you?'
"'Huckleberry Finn! Quick, let me in!'
"'Huckleberry Finn, indeed. It ain't a name to open many doors, I judge. But let him in,
lads, and let's see what's the trouble.'
"'Please don't ever tell I told you,' were Huck's first words when he got in.
"'Please don't. I'd be killed, sure. But the widow's been good friends to me sometimes,
and I want to tell. I will tell, if you'll promise you won't ever say it was me.'
"'By George, he has got something to tell, or he wouldn't act so,' exclaimed the old
man.
"'Out with it, and nobody here'll ever tell, lad.'
Three minutes later the old man and his sons, well armed, were up the hill and just entering
the Sumac path on tiptoe, their weapons in their hands. Huck accompanied them no farther.
He hid behind a great boulder and fell to listening. There was a lagging, anxious silence,
and then all of a sudden there was an explosion of firearms and a cry. Huck waited for no
particulars. He sprang away and sped down the hill as fast as his legs could carry him.'
As the earliest suspicion of dawn appeared on Sunday morning, Huck came groping up the
hill and rapped gently at the old Welshman's door. The inmates were asleep, but it was
set on a hair-trigger, on account of the exciting episode of the night. A call came from a
window.
"'Who's there?' Huck's scared voice answered in a low tone.
"'Please let me in. It's only Huck Finn.'
"'It's a name that can open this door night or day, lad, and welcome.' These were strange
words to the vagabond boy's ears, and the pleasantest he had ever heard. He could not
recollect that the closing word had ever been applied in his case before. The door was
quickly unlocked, and he entered. Huck was given a seat, and the old man and his brace
of tall suns speedily dressed themselves.
"'Now, my boy, I hope you're good and hungry, because breakfast will be ready as soon as
the sun's up, and we'll have a piping hot one, too. Make yourself easy about that. I and
the boys hoped you'd turn up and stop here last night.'
"'I was awful scared,' said Huck, and I run. I took out when the pistols went off, and
for three miles. I've come now because I wanted to know about it, you know, and I come before
daylight because I didn't want to run across them devils even if they was dead.'
"'Well, poor chap, you do look as if you'd had a hard night of it. But there's a bed
here for you, when you've had your breakfast.'
"'No, they ain't dead, lad. We were sorry enough for that. You see, we knew rightward
to put our hands on them, by your description, so we crept along on tiptoe till we got within
fifteen feet of them, dark as the cellar that Sumac Path was. And just then I found I was
going to sneeze. It was the meanest kind of luck. I tried to keep it back, but no use.
It was bound to come, and it did come. I was in the lead with my pistol raised, and when
the sneeze started, those scoundrels were rustling to get out of the path. I sung out
FIRE, boys, and blazed away at the place where the rustling was. So did the boys. But they
were off in a jiffy, those villains, and we after them down through the woods. I judge
we never touched them. They fired a shot apiece as they started, but their bullets whizzed
by and didn't do us any harm. As soon as we lost the sound of their feet, we quit chasing,
and went down and stirred up the constables. They got a posse together, and went off to
guard the river bank. And as soon as it is light, the sheriff and a gang are going to
beat up the woods. My boys will be with them presently. I wish we had some sort of description
of those rascals. It would help a good deal. But you couldn't see what they were like
in the dark, lad, I suppose.
Oh, yes, I saw them down town and followed them.
Splendid! Describe them! Describe them, my boy!
One is the old deaf and dumb Spaniard that's been round here once or twice, and tothers
a mean-looking ragged—
That's enough, lad, we know the men. Happened on them in the woods, back of the widows one
day, and they slunk away.
Off with you, boys, and tell the sheriff, get your breakfast tomorrow morning."
The Welshman's sons departed at once. As they were leaving the room, Huck sprang up and
exclaimed,
Oh, please don't tell anybody it was me that blowed on them! Oh, please!
All right, if you say it, Huck, but you ought to have the credit of what you did. Oh, no,
no, please don't tell!
When the young men were gone, the old Welshman said,
They won't tell, and I won't. But why don't you want it known?
Huck would not explain. Further than to say that he already knew too much about one of
those men, and would not have the man know that he knew anything against him for the
whole world. He would be killed for knowing it, sure.
The old man promised secrecy once more, and said,
How did you come to follow these fellows, lad? Were they looking suspicious?
Huck was silent, while he framed a duly cautious reply, and then he said,
Well, you see, I'm a kind of a hard lot, at least everybody says so, and I don't see nothing
again it, and sometimes I can't sleep much on accounts of thinking about it, and sort
of trying to strike out a new way of doing. That was the way it was last night, I couldn't
sleep, and so I come along up street about midnight at turning it all over, and when
I got to that old shackly brick store by the Temperance Tavern, I backed up again the wall
to have another think. Well, just then along comes these two chaps, slipping along close
by me, with something under their arm, and I reckoned they'd stole it. One was a-smoking,
and t'other one wanted a light, so they stopped right before me, and the cigars lit up their
faces, and I see that the big one was the deaf and dumb Spaniard, by his white whiskers
and the patch on his eye, and t'other one was a rusty ragged-looking devil. Could you
see the rags by the light of the cigars?
This staggered Huck for a moment. Then he said,
"'Well, I don't know, but somehow it seems as if I did.'
"'Then they went on, and you?'
"'Follow them, yes. That was it. I wanted to see what was up.'
"'They sneaked along, so I dogged them to the Witter's style, and stood in the dark,
and heard the ragged one beg for the Witter, and the Spaniard swear he'd spile her looks,
just as I told you, in your two--"
"'What? The deaf and dumb man said all that?'
Huck had made another terrible mistake. He was trying his best to keep the old man from
getting the faintest hint of who the Spaniard might be, and yet his tongue seemed determined
to get him into trouble in spite of all he could do. He made several efforts to creep
out of his scrape, but the old man's eye was upon him, and he made blunder after blunder.
Presently the Welshman said,
"'My boy, don't be afraid of me. I wouldn't hurt a hair of your head for all the world.
No, I'd protect you. I'll—I'd protect you. This Spaniard is not deaf and dumb. You've
let that slip without intending it. You can't cover that up now. You know something about
that Spaniard that you want to keep dark. Now trust me. Tell me what it is, and trust
me. I won't betray you.'
Huck looked into the old man's honest eyes a moment, then bent over and whispered in
his ear,
"'Taint the Spaniard. It's Injun Joe!"
The Welshman almost jumped out of his chair. In a moment he said,
"'It's all plain enough now. When you talked about notching ears and the slitting noses,
I judged that was your own embellishment, because white men don't take that sort of
revenge. But an Injun, that's a different matter altogether.'
During breakfast the talk went on, and in the course of it the old man said that the
bed was to get a lantern, and examine the style and its vicinity for marks of blood.
They found none, but captured a bulky bundle of—
"'Of what?'
If the words had been lightning they could not have leapt with a more stunning suddenness
from Huck's blanched lips. His eyes were staring wide now, and his breath suspended, waiting
for the answer. The Welshman started, stared in return, three seconds, five seconds, ten.'
Then replied,
"'Of burglar's tools. Why, what's the matter with you?'
Huck sank back, panting gently, but deeply, unutterably grateful. The Welshman eyed him
gravely, curiously, and presently said,
"'Yes, burglar's tools. That appears to relieve you a good deal. But what did give you that
turn? What were you expecting we'd found?'
Huck was in a close place. The inquiring eye was upon him. He would have given anything
for material for a plausible answer. Nothing suggested itself. The inquiring eye was boring
deeper and deeper. A senseless reply offered. There was no time to weigh it. So at a venture
he uttered it, feebly.
"'Sunday school books, maybe?'
Poor Huck was too distressed to smile. But the old man laughed loud and joyously, shook
up the details of his anatomy from head to foot, and ended by saying that such a laugh
was money in a man's pocket, because it cut down the doctor's bills like everything. Then
he added,
"'Poor old chap! You're white and jaded. You ain't well a bit. No wonder you're a little
flighty and off your balance. But you'll come out of it. Rest and sleep. We'll catch you
up all right, I hope.'
Huck was irritated to think he had been such a goose, and betrayed such a suspicious excitement,
for he had dropped the idea that the parcel brought from the tavern was the treasure as
soon as he had heard the talk at the Witter's style. He had only thought it was not the
treasure, however. He had not known that it wasn't, and so the suggestion of a captured
bundle was too much for his self-possession. But on the whole he felt glad the little episode
had happened, for now he knew beyond all question that that bundle was not THE bundle, and so
his mind was at rest and exceedingly comfortable. In fact, everything seemed to be drifting
just in the right direction now. The treasurer must be still in number two. The men would
be captured and jailed that day, and he and Tom could seize the gold that night without
any trouble or any fear of interruption.
Just as breakfast was completed there was a knock at the door. Huck jumped for a hiding
place, for he had no mind to be connected even remotely with the late event. The Welshman
admitted several ladies and gentlemen, among them the widow Douglas, and noticed that groups
of citizens were climbing up the hill to stare at the style, so the news had spread.
The Welshman had to tell the story of the night to the visitors. The widow's gratitude
for her preservation was outspoken.
"'Don't say a word about it, madam. There's another that you're more beholden to than
you are to me and my boys, maybe, but he don't allow me to tell his name. We wouldn't have
been there but for him.' Of course, this excited a curiosity so vast that it almost belittled
the main matter, but the Welshman allowed it to eat into the vitals of his visitors,
and through them be transmitted to the whole town, for he refused to part with his secret.
When all else had been learned, the widow said,
"'I went to sleep reading in bed, and slept straight through all that noise. Why didn't
you come and wake me?'
"'We judged it weren't worth while. Those fellows weren't likely to come again. They
had many tools left to work with. And what was the use of waking you up and scaring you
to death? My three negro men stood guard at your house all the rest of the night. They've
just come back.'
More visitors came, and the story had to be told and retold for a couple of hours more.
There was no Sabbath school during day-school vacation, but everybody was early at church.
The stirring event was well canvassed. News came that not a sign of the two villains had
been yet discovered. When the sermon was finished, Judge Thatcher's wife dropped alongside of
Mrs. Harper as she moved down the aisle with a crowd, and said,
"'Is my Becky going to sleep all day? I just expected she would be tired to death.'
"'Your Becky?'
"'Yes,' with a startled look. "'Didn't she stay with you last night?'
"'Why, no!' Mrs. Thatcher turned pale and sank into a pew, just as Aunt Polly, talking
briskly with a friend, passed by. Aunt Polly said,
"'Good morning, Mrs. Thatcher. Good morning, Mrs. Harper. I've got a boy that's
turned up missing. I reckon my Tom stayed at your house last night—one of you. And
now he's afraid to come to church. I've got to settle with him.'
Mrs. Thatcher shook her head feebly and turned paler than ever.
"'He didn't stay with us,' said Mrs. Harper, beginning to look uneasy. A marked anxiety
came into Aunt Polly's face.
"'Joe Harper, have you seen my Tom this morning?'
"'No, ma'am.'
"'When did you see him last?' Joe tried to remember, but was not sure he could say. The
people had stopped moving out of church, whispers passed along, and aboding uneasiness took
possession of every countenance. Children were anxiously questioned, and young teachers.
They all said they had not noticed whether Tom and Becky were on board the ferry-boat
on the homeward trip. It was dark. No one thought of inquiring if anyone was missing.
One young man finally blurted out his fear that they were still in the cave. Mrs. Thatcher
wound away. Aunt Polly fell to crying and wringing her hands.
The alarm swept from lip to lip, from group to group, from street to street, and within
five minutes the bells were wildly clanging and the whole town was up. The Cardiff Hill
episode sank into instant insignificance, the burglars were forgotten, horses were saddled,
skiffs were manned, the ferry-boat ordered out, and before the horror was half an hour
old, two hundred men were pouring down High Road and River toward the cave. All the long
afternoon the village seemed empty and dead. Many women visited Aunt Polly and Mrs. Thatcher
and tried to comfort them. They cried with them, too, and that was still better than
words. All the tedious night the town waited for news, but when the morning dawned at last
all the word that came was, Send more candles, and send food!
Mrs. Thatcher was almost crazed, and Aunt Polly also. Judge Thatcher sent messages of
hope and encouragement from the cave, but they conveyed no real cheer. The old Welshman
came home toward daylight, spattered with candle-grease, smeared with clay, and almost
worn out. He found Huck still in the bed, that had been provided for him, and delirious
with fever. The physicians were all at the cave, so the widow Douglas came and took charge
of the patient. She said she would do her best by him, because, whether he was good,
or bad, or indifferent, he was the Lord's, and nothing that was the Lord's was a thing
to be neglected. The Welshman said Huck had good spots in him, and the widow said,
"'You can depend on it. That's the Lord's mark. He don't leave it off. He never does.
Puts it somewhere on every creature that comes from his hands.'"
Early in the forenoon parties of jaded men began to straggle into the village, but the
strongest of the citizens continued searching. All the news that could be gained was that
the remotenesses of the cavern were being ransacked, that had never been visited before,
that every corner and crevice was going to be thoroughly searched, that, wherever one
wandered through the maze of passages, lights were to be seen flitting hither and thither
in the distance, and shoutings and pistol-shots sent their hollow reverberations to the ear
down the somber aisles. In one place, far from the section usually traversed by tourists,
the names Becky and Tom had been found traced upon the rocky wall with candle-smoke and
near at hand a grease-soiled bit of ribbon. Mrs. Thatcher recognized the ribbon and cried
over it. She said it was the last relic she would ever have of her child, and that no
other memorial of her could ever be so precious, because this one parted latest from the living
body before the awful death came. Some said that now and then in the cave a faraway speck
of light would glimmer, and then a glorious shout would burst forth, and a score of men
go trooping down the echoing aisle, and then a sickening disappointment always followed.
The children were not there. It was only a searcher's light. Three dreadful days and
nights dragged their tedious hours along, and the village sank into a hopeless stupor.
No one had heart for anything. The accidental discovery just made that the proprietor of
kept liquor on his premises, scarcely fluttered the public pulse, tremendous as the fact was.
In a lucid interval Huck feebly led up to the subject of taverns, and finally asked,
dimly dreading the worst, if anything had been discovered at the Temperance Tavern since
he had been ill.
"'Yes,' said the widow. Huck started up in bed wild-eyed.
"'What? What was it?'
"'Liquor. And the place has been shut up.'
"'Lie down, child. What a turn you did give me. Only tell me just one thing, only just
one, please. Was it Tom Sawyer that found it?'
The widow burst into tears.
"'Hush, hush, child, hush. I've told you before, you must not talk. You are very, very
sick.'
Then nothing but liquor had been found. There would have been a great pow-wow if it had
been the gold. So the treasure was gone for ever—gone for ever. But what could she be
crying about? Curious that she should cry? These thoughts worked their dim way through
Huck's mind, and under the weariness they gave him—'
He fell asleep.
The widow said to herself,
"'There! He's asleep, poor wreck. Tom Sawyer find it. Pity but somebody could find Tom
Sawyer. Ah, there ain't many left now. It's got hope enough, or strength enough, either,
to go on searching.'
Now, to return to Tom and Becky's share in the picnic, they tripped
along the murky isles with the rest of the company, visiting the
familiar wonders of the cave, wonders dubbed with rather over-descriptive
names, such as the Drawing Room, the Cathedral, Aladdin's Palace, and
so on. Presently the hide-and-seek frolicking began, and Tom and Becky
engaged in it with zeal, until the exertion began to grow a trifle
wearisome. Then they wandered down a sinuous avenue, holding their
candles aloft, and reading the tangled web-work of names, dates, post-office
addresses, and mottos, with which the rocky walls had been frescoed in
a candle-smoke. Still drifting along and talking, they scarcely noticed
that they were now in a part of the cave whose walls were not frescoed.
They smoked their own names under an overhanging shelf, and moved on.
Presently they came to a place where a little stream of water, trickling
over a ledge, and carrying a limestone sediment with it, had, in the
slow-dragging ages, formed a laced and ruffled Niagara in gleaming and
imperishable stone. Tom squeezed his small body behind it in order to
illuminate it for Becky's gratification. He found that it curtained a
sort of steep natural stairway which was enclosed between narrow walls,
and at once the ambition to be a discoverer seized him. Becky responded
to his call, and they made a smoke-mark for future guidance, and started
upon their quest. They wound this way and that far down into the secret
depths of the cave, made another mark, and branched off in search of
novelties to tell the upper world about. In one place they found a
spacious cavern from whose ceiling depended a multitude of shining
stalactites of the length and circumference of a man's leg. They walked
all about it, wondering and admiring, and presently left it by one of
the numerous passages that opened into it. This shortly brought them to
a bewitching spring whose basin was encrusted with a frostwork of
glittering crystals. It was in the midst of a cavern whose walls were
supported by many fantastic pillars which had been formed by the
joining of great stalactites and stalagmites together, the result of
the ceaseless water-drip of centuries. Under the roof, vast knots of
bats had packed themselves together, thousands in a bunch, the lights
disturbed the creatures, and they came flocking down by hundreds
squeaking and darting furiously at the candles. Tom knew their ways, and
he knew the danger of this sort of conduct. He seized Becky's hand and
hurried her into the first corridor that offered, and none too soon,
for a bat struck Becky's light out with its wing while she was passing
out of the cavern. The bats chased the children a good distance, but
the fugitives plunged into every new passage that offered, and at last
got rid of the perilous things. Tom found a subterranean lake shortly,
which stretched its dim length away until its shape was lost in the
shadows. He wanted to explore its borders, but concluded that it would
be best to sit down and rest awhile first. Now, for the first time, the
deep stillness of the place laid a clammy hand upon the spirits of the
children. Becky said,
"'Why, I didn't notice, but it seems ever so long since I heard of any
of the others.'
"'Come to think, Becky, we are a way down below them, and I don't know
how far away north or south or east or whichever it is. We couldn't
hear them here.' Becky grew apprehensive.
"'I wonder how long we've been down here, Tom. We'd better start back.'
"'Yes, I reckon we'd better. Perhaps we'd better. Can you find the way,
Tom? It's all a mixed-up crookedness to me.'
"'I reckon I could find it, but then the bats. If they put both of our
candles out, it will be an awful fix. Let's try some other way, so as
not to go through there.'
"'Well, but I hope we won't get lost. It would be so awful.' And the
girls shuddered at the thought of the dreadful possibilities. They
started through a corridor and traversed it in silence a long way,
glancing at each new opening to see if there was anything familiar about
the look of it. But they were all strange. Every time Tom made an
examination, Becky would watch his face for an encouraging sign, and he
would say cheerily,
"'Oh, it's all right. This ain't the one. But we'll come to it right
away.'
But he felt less and less hopeful with each failure, and presently began
to turn off into diverging avenues at sheer random, in desperate hope of
finding the one that was wanted. He still said it was all right, but
there was such a leaden dread at his heart that the words had lost their
ring and sounded just as if he had said,
"'All is lost.' Becky clung to his side in an anguish of fear, and tried
hard to keep back the tears. But they would come. At last she said,
"'Oh, Tom, never mind the bats. Let's go back that way. We seem to get
worse and worse off all the time.' Tom stopped.
"'Listen,' said he. Profound silence. Silence so deep that even their
breathings were conspicuous in the hush. Tom shouted. The call went
echoing down the empty aisles and died out in the distance in a faint
sound that resembled a ripple of mocking laughter.
"'Oh, don't do it again, Tom. It is too horrid,' said Becky.
"'It is horrid, but I better, Becky. They might hear us, you know.' And
he shouted again. The might was even a chillier horror than the ghostly
laughter. It so confessed a perishing hope. The children stood still and
listened. But there was no result. Tom turned upon the back track at
once and hurried his steps. It was but a little while before a certain
indecision in his manner revealed another fearful fact to Becky. He
could not find his way back.
"'Oh, Tom, you didn't make any marks. Becky, I was such a fool, such a
fool. I never thought we might want to come back. No, I can't find the
way. It's all mixed up. Tom! Tom, we're lost! We're lost! We never can
get out of this awful place. Why did we ever leave the others?' She
sank to the ground and burst into such a frenzy of crying that Tom was
appalled with the idea that she might die, or lose her reason. He sat
down by her and put his arms around her. She buried her face in his
bosom. She clung to him. She poured out her terrors, her unavailing
regrets, and the far echoes turned them all to jeering laughter. Tom
begged her to pluck up hope again, and she said she could not. He fell
to blaming and abusing himself for getting her into this miserable
situation, and this had a better effect. She said she would try to hope
again. She would get up and follow wherever he might lead, if only he
would not talk like that any more, for he was no more to blame than she,
she said. So they moved on again aimlessly, simply at random. All they
could do was to move, keep moving. For a little while, hope made a show
of reviving, not with any reason to back it, but only because it is its
nature to revive, when the spring has not been taken out of it by age
and familiarity with failure.
By and by Tom took Becky's candle and blew it out. This economy meant
so much. Words were not needed. Becky understood, and her hope died
again. She knew that Tom had a whole candle and three or four pieces in
his pockets, yet he must economize. By and by fatigue began to assert
its claims. The children tried to pay no attention, for it was dreadful
to think of sitting down when time was grown to be so precious. Moving
in some direction, in any direction, was at least progress, and might
bear fruit, but to sit down was to invite death and shorten its pursuit.
At last Becky's frail limbs refused to carry her farther. She sat down.
Tom rested with her, and they talked of home, and the friends there,
and the comfortable beds, and, above all, the light. Becky cried, and
Tom tried to think of some way of comforting her, but all his
encouragement were grown threadbare with use, and sounded like
sarcasms.
Fatigue bore so heavily upon Becky that she drowsed off to sleep. Tom
was grateful. He sat looking into her drawn face and saw it grow
smooth and natural under the influence of pleasant dreams, and by and
by a smile dawned and rested there. The peaceful face reflected somewhat
of peace and healing into his own spirit, and his thoughts wandered
way to bygone times and dreamy memories.
While he was deep in his musings, Becky woke up with a breezy little
laugh, but it was stricken dead upon her lips, and a groan followed it.
Oh, how could I sleep! I wish I never, never had waked! No, no, I don't,
Tom. Don't look so. I won't say it again. I'm glad you've slept, Becky.
You'll feel rested now, and we'll find the way out. We can try, Tom,
But I've seen such a beautiful country in my dream. I reckon we are
going there.
Maybe not. Maybe not. Cheer up, Becky, and let's go on trying.
They rose up and wandered along, hand in hand, and hopeless. They tried
to estimate how long they had been in the cave, but all they knew was
that it seemed days and weeks, and yet it was plain that this could not
be, for their candles were not gone yet. A long time after this, they
could not tell how long. Tom said they must go softly and listen to
dripping water. They must find a spring. They found one presently, and
Tom said it was time to rest again. Both were cruelly tired, yet Becky
said she thought she could go on a little farther. She was surprised to
hear Tom dissent. She could not understand it. They sat down, and Tom
fastened his candle to the wall in front of them with some clay. Thought
was soon busy, nothing was said for some time. Then Becky broke the
silence.
"'Tom, I'm so hungry!' Tom took something out of his pocket. Do you
remember this?' said he.
Becky almost smiled.
"'It's our wedding cake, Tom!'
"'Yes, I wish it was as big as a barrel, for it's all we've got.'
"'I saved it from the picnic for us to dream on, Tom, the way grown-up
people do with wedding cake, but it'll be our--"
She dropped the sentence, where it was.
Tom divided the cake, and Becky ate with good appetite, while Tom
nibbled at his moiety. There was abundance of cold water to finish the
feast with. By-and-by, Becky suggested that they move on again. Tom was
silent a moment, then he said,
"'Becky, can you bear it if I tell you something?'
Becky's face paled, but she thought she could.
"'Well, then, Becky, we must stay here, where there's water to drink.
That little piece is our last candle.'
Becky gave loose to tears and wailings. Tom did what he could to
comfort her, but with little effect. At length, Becky said,
"'Tom!'
"'Well, Becky, they'll miss us and hunt for us.'
"'Yes, they will. Certainly they will. Maybe they're hunting for us
now, Tom.'
"'Why, I reckon, maybe they are. I hope they are.'
"'When would they miss us, Tom?'
"'When they get back to the boat, I reckon.'
"'Tom, it might be dark, then. Would they notice we hadn't come?'
"'I don't know. But anyway, your mother would miss you as soon as they
got home.'
A frightened look in Becky's face brought Tom to his senses, and he
saw that he had made a blunder. Becky was not to have gone home that
night. The children became silent and thoughtful. In a moment a new
burst of grief from Becky showed Tom that the thing in his mind had
struck hers also, that the Sabbath morning might be half spent before
Mrs. Thatcher discovered that Becky was not at Mrs. Harper's. The
children fastened their eyes upon their bit of candle, and watched it
melt slowly and pitilessly away, saw the half-inch of wick stand alone
at last, saw the feeble flame rise and fall, climbed the thin column of
smoke, linger at its top a moment, and then the horror of utter darkness
reigned.
How long afterward it was that Becky came to a slow consciousness that
she was crying in Tom's arms, neither could tell. All that they knew
was that, after what seemed a mighty stretch of time, both awoke out
of a dead stupor of sleep and resumed their miseries once more. Tom
said it might be Sunday now, maybe Monday. He tried to get Becky to
talk, but her sorrows were too oppressive. All her hopes were gone. Tom
said that they must have been missed long ago, and no doubt the search
was going on. He would shout, and maybe someone would come. He tried
it, but in the darkness the distant echoes sounded so hideously that
he tried it no more.
The hours wasted away, and hunger came to torment the captives again. A
portion of Tom's half of the cake was left. They divided and ate it. But
they seemed hungrier than before. The poor morsel of food only whetted
desire.
By-and-by Tom said,
"'Shh! Did you hear that?'
Both held their breath and listened. There was a sound like the faintest
far-off shout. Instantly Tom answered it, and leading Becky by the hand,
started groping down the corridor in its direction. Presently he listened
again. Again the sound was heard, and apparently a little nearer.
"'It's them,' said Tom.
"'They're coming. Come along, Becky. We're all right now.' The joy of the
prisoners was almost overwhelming. Their speed was slow, however,
because pitfalls were somewhat common, and had to be guarded against.
They shortly came to one, and had to stop. It might be three feet deep.
It might be a hundred. There was no passing it at any rate. Tom got down
on his breast, and reached as far down as he could. No bottom. They must
stay there and wait until the searchers came. They listened. Evidently
the distant shoutings were growing more distant. A moment or two more,
and they had gone altogether. The heart-sinking misery of it. Tom whooped
until he was hoarse, but it was of no use. He talked hopefully to Becky,
but an age of anxious waiting passed, and no sounds came again. The
children groped their way back to the spring. The weary time dragged on.
They slept again, and awoke famished and woe-stricken. Tom believed it
must be Tuesday by this time. Now an idea struck him. There were some
side passages near at hand. It would be better to explore some of these
than bear the weight of the heavy time in idleness. He took a kite-line
from his pocket, tied it to a projection, and he and Becky started, Tom
in the lead, unwinding the line as he groped along. At the end of twenty
paces the corridor ended in a jumping-off place. Tom got down on his
knees and felt below, and then as far around the corner as he could
reach with his hands conveniently. He made an effort to stretch yet a
little farther to the right, and at that moment, not twenty yards away,
a human hand holding a candle appeared from behind a rock. Tom lifted
up a glorious shout, and instantly that hand was followed by the body
it belonged to. Injun Joe's! Tom was paralyzed. He could not move. He
was vastly gratified the next moment to see the Spaniard take to his
heels and get himself out of sight. Tom wondered that Joe had not
recognized his voice and come over and killed him for testifying in
court. But the echoes must have disguised the voice. Without doubt
that was it, he reasoned. Tom's fright weakened every muscle in his
body. He said to himself that if he had strength enough to get back to
the spring he would stay there, and nothing should tempt him to run the
risk of meeting Injun Joe again. He was careful to keep from Becky what
it was he had seen. He told her he had only shouted for luck.
But hunger and wretchedness rise superior to fears in the long run.
Another tedious wait of the spring and another long sleep brought
changes. The children awoke, tortured with a raging hunger. Tom
believed that it must be Wednesday or Thursday, or even Friday or
Saturday now, and that the search had been given over. He proposed to
explore another passage. He felt willing to risk Injun Joe and all
other terrors. But Becky was very weak. She had sunk into a dreary
apathy and would not be roused. She said she would wait, now, where she
was, and die. It would not be long. She told Tom to go with his kite
line and explore if he chose, but she implored him to come back every
little while and speak to her, and she made him promise that when the
awful time came he would stay by her and hold her hand until all was
over. Tom kissed her with a choking sensation in his throat, and made
a show of being confident of finding the searchers or an escape from
the cave. Then he took the kite line in his hand and went groping down
one of the passages on his hands and knees, distressed with hunger and
sick with bodings of coming doom.
Turn out! They're found!
Tuesday afternoon came and waned to the twilight. The village of St.
Petersburg still mourned. The lost children had not been found. Public
prayers had been offered up for them, and many and many a private prayer
that had the petitioner's whole heart in it, but still no good news came
from the cave. The majority of the searchers had given up the quest and
gone back to their daily vocations, saying that it was plain the
ill, and a great part of the time delirious. People said it was
heartbreaking to hear her call her child, and raise her head and listen
a whole minute at a time, then lay it wearily down again with a moan.
Aunt Polly had drooped into a settled melancholy, and her gray hair had
grown almost white. The village went to its rest on Tuesday night, sad
and forlorn. Away in the middle of the night a wild peal burst from the
village bells, and in a moment the streets were swarming with frantic
half-clad people, who shouted,
"'Turn out! Turn out! They're found! They're found!'
Tin pans and horns were added to the din. The population massed itself
and moved toward the river, met the children coming in an open carriage
drawn by shouting citizens, thronged around it, joined its homeward
march, and swept magnificently up the main street roaring, "'Huzzah!'
after huzzah!'
The village was illuminated. Nobody went to bed again. It was the
a procession of villagers filed through Judge Thatcher's house, seized
the saved ones, and kissed them, squeezed Mrs. Thatcher's hand, tried
to speak but couldn't, and drifted out raining tears all over the place.
Aunt Polly's happiness was complete, and Mrs. Thatcher's nearly so. It
would be complete, however, as soon as the messenger dispatched with the
great news to the cave should get the word to her husband. Tom lay upon
a sofa with an eager auditory about him, and told the history of the
wonderful adventure, putting in many striking additions to adorn it with
all, and closed with a description of how he left Becky and went on an
exploring expedition, how he followed two avenues as far as his kite
line would reach, how he followed a third to the fullest stretch of the
kite line, and was about to turn back when he glimpsed a far-off speck
that looked like daylight, dropped the line and groped toward it, pushed
his head and shoulders through a small hole, and saw the broad
Mississippi rolling by. And if it had only happened to be night, he
would not have seen that speck of daylight, and would not have explored
that passage any more. He told how he went back for Becky, and broke the
good news, and she told him not to fret her with such stuff, for she
was tired, and knew she was going to die, and wanted to. He described
how he labored with her and convinced her, and how she almost died for
joy when she had groped to where she actually saw the blue speck of
daylight, how he pushed his way out at the hole and then helped her out,
how they sat there and cried for gladness, how some men came along in a
skiff, and Tom hailed them and told them their situation and their
famished condition, how the men didn't believe the wild tale at first,
because, said they, you are five miles down the river, below the valley
the cave is in, then took them aboard, rode to a house, gave them
supper, made them rest till two or three hours after dark, and then
brought them home.
Before day dawn, Judge Thatcher and the handful of searchers with him
were tracked out in the cave by the twine clues they had strung behind
them and informed of the great news. Three days and nights of toil and
hunger in the cave were not to be shaken off at once, as Tom and Becky
soon discovered. They were bedridden all of Wednesday and Thursday,
and seemed to grow more and more tired and worn all the time. Tom got
about a little on Thursday, was downtown Friday, and nearly as whole as
ever Saturday, but Becky did not leave her room until Sunday, and then
she looked as if she had passed through a wasting illness.
Tom learned of Huck's sickness and went to see him on Friday, but could
not be admitted to the bedroom. Neither could he on Saturday or Sunday.
He was admitted daily after that, but was warned to keep still about
his adventure and introduced no exciting topic. The widow Douglas
stayed by to see that he obeyed. At home Tom learned of the Cardiff
kill-event, also that the ragged man's body had eventually been found
in the river near the ferry landing. He had been drowned while trying
to escape, perhaps.
About a fortnight after Tom's rescue from the cave, he started off to
visit Huck, who had grown plenty strong enough now to hear exciting
talk, and Tom had some that would interest him, he thought. Judge
Thatcher's house was on Tom's way, and he stopped to see Becky. The
ironically, if he wouldn't like to go to the cave again. Tom said he
thought he wouldn't mind it. The judge said,
"'Well, there are others just like you, Tom. I've not the least doubt.
But we have taken care of that. Nobody will get lost in that cave
any more.'
"'Why?'
"'Because I had its big door sheathed with boiler-iron two weeks ago,
and triple-locked, and I've got the keys.'
Tom turned as white as a sheet.
"'What's the matter, boy? Here, run somebody. Fetch a glass of water.'
The water was brought and thrown into Tom's face.
"'Ah, now you're all right. What was the matter with you, Tom?'
"'Oh, Judge! Injun Joe's in the cave!'
XXXIII. The Fate of Injun Joe.
Within a few minutes the news had spread, and a dozen skiff-loads of men were on their
way to MacDougall's cave, and the ferry-boat, well filled with passengers, soon followed.
Tom Sawyer was in a skiff that bore Judge Thatcher. When the cave-door was unlocked,
a sorrowful sight presented itself in the dim twilight of the place. Injun Joe lay stretched
upon the ground, dead, with his face close to the crack of the door, as if his longing
eyes had been fixed to the latest moment upon the light and the cheer of the free world
outside. Tom was touched, for he knew by his own experience how this wretch had suffered.
His pity was moved, but nevertheless he felt an abounding sense of relief and security
now which revealed to him, in a degree which he had not fully appreciated before, how vast
a weight of dread had been lying upon him since the day he lifted his voice against
this bloody-minded outcast.
Injun Joe's bowie-knife lay close by, its blade broken in two. The great foundation
beam of the door had been chipped and hacked through with tedious labor. Useless labor,
too, it was, for the native rock formed a sill outside it, and upon that stubborn material
the knife had wrought no effect. The only damage done was to the knife itself. But if
there had been no stony obstruction there, the labor would have been useless still, for
if the beam had been wholly cut away, Injun Joe could not have squeezed his body under
the door, and he knew it. So he had only hacked that place in order to be doing something,
in order to pass the weary time, in order to employ his tortured faculties. Ordinarily
one could find half a dozen bits of candles stuck around in the crevices of this vestibule,
left there by tourists, but there were none now. The prisoner had searched them out and
eaten them. He had also contrived to catch a few bats, and these also he had eaten, leaving
only their claws. The poor unfortunate had starved to death. In one place near at hand
a stalagmite had been slowly growing up from the ground for ages, builded by the water-drip
from a stalactite overhead. The captive had broken off the stalagmite, and upon the stump
had placed a stone, wherein he had scooped a shallow hollow to catch the precious drop
that fell once in every three minutes, with the dreary regularity of a clock-tick, a dessert
spoonful once in four and twenty hours. That drop was falling when the pyramids were new,
when Troy fell, when the foundations of Rome were laid, when Christ was crucified, when
the conqueror created the British Empire, when Columbus sailed, when the massacre at
Lexington was news. It is falling now. It will still be falling when all these things
shall have sunk down the afternoon of history and the twilight of tradition, and been swallowed
up in the thick night of oblivion. Has everything a purpose and a mission? Did this drop fall
patiently during five thousand years to be ready for this flitting human insect's need?
And has it another important object to accomplish ten thousand years to come? No matter. It
is many and many a year since the hapless half-breed scooped out the stone to catch
the priceless drops. But to this day the tourist stares longest at that pathetic stone and
that slow-dropping water when he comes to see the wonders of MacDougall's cave. Injun
Joe's cup stands first in the list of the cavern's marvels. Even Aladdin's palace cannot
rival it.
Injun Joe was buried near the mouth of the cave, and people flocked there in boats and
wagons from the towns and from all the farms and hamlets for seven miles around. They brought
their children and all sorts of provisions, and confessed that they had had almost as
satisfactory a time at the funeral as they could have had at the hanging. This funeral
stopped the further growth of one thing—the petition to the governor for Injun Joe's pardon.
The petition had been largely signed, many tearful and eloquent meetings had been held,
and a committee of sappy women had been appointed to go in deep mourning and wail around the
and implore him to be a merciful ass and trample his duty underfoot. Injun Joe was believed
to have killed five citizens of the village, but what of that? If he had been Satan himself
there would have been plenty of weaklings ready to scribble their names to a pardon
petition and drip a tear on it from their permanently impaired and leaky waterworks.
The morning after the funeral Tom took Huck to a private place to have an important talk.
Huck had learned all about Tom's adventure from the Welshmen and the widow, Douglas,
by this time, but Tom said he reckoned there was one thing they had not told him. That
thing was what he wanted to talk about now.
Huck's face saddened. He said,
"'I know what it is. You got into Number Two and never found anything but whiskey. Nobody
told me it was you, but I just noted must have been you, as soon as I heard about that
whiskey business. And I knowed you hadn't got the money, because you'd have got it me
some way or other and told me even if you was mum to everybody else. Tom, something's
always told me we'd never get hold of that swag.'
"'Why, Huck, I never told on that tavern keeper. You know his tavern was all right
the Saturday I went to the picnic. Don't you remember you was to watch there that night?'
"'Oh, yes. Why, it seems about a year ago. It was that very night that I followed Injun
Joe to the widders.'
"'You followed him?'
"'Yes, but you keep mum. I reckon Injun Joe's left friends behind him, and I don't
them soaring on me and doing me mean tricks. If it hadn't been for me he'd be down in
Texas now, all right.' Then Huck told his entire adventure in confidence to Tom, who
had only heard of the Welshman's part of it before.
"'Well,' said Huck, presently, coming back to the main question, "'whoever nipped
the whiskey in Number Two nipped the money, too, I reckon. Anyway, it's a goner for us,
Tom.'
"'Huck, that money wasn't ever in Number Two.'
"'What?' Huck searched his comrade's face keenly.
"'Tom, have you got on the track of that money again?'
"'Huck, it's in the cave!' Huck's eyes blazed.
"'Say it again, Tom. The money's in the cave.'
"'Tom, honest Injun now, is it fun or earnest?'
"'Ernest, Huck. Just as earnest as ever I was in my life. Will you go in there with
me and help me get it out?'
"'I bet I will. I will if it's where we can blaze our way to it and not get lost. Huck,
we can do that without the least little bit of trouble in the world.'
"'Good as wheat. What makes you think the money's—'
"'Huck, you just wait till we get in there. If we don't find it, I'll agree to give you
my drum and everything I've got in the world. I will, by jings.'
"'All right, it's a whiz. When do you say?'
"'Right now, if you say it. Are you strong enough?'
"'Is it far in the cave? I've been on my pins a little three, four days now, but I can't
walk more than a mile, Tom. Least I don't think I could.'
"'It's about five mile into there, the way anybody but me would go, Huck. But there's
a mighty short cut that they don't anybody but me know about. Huck, I'll take you right
to it in a skiff. I'll float the skiff down there, and I'll pull it back again all by
myself. You needn't ever turn your hand over. Let's start right off, Tom. All right. We
want some bread and meat and our pipes and a little bag or two and two or three kite
strings and some of these newfangled things they call Lucifer matches. I tell you, many's
the time I wished I had some when I was in there before. A trifle afternoon the boys
borrowed a small skiff from a citizen who was absent, and got under way at once. When
they were several miles below Cave Hollow, Tom said,
"'Now, you see this bluff here looks all alike all the way down from the Cave Hollow? No
houses, no woodyards, bushes all alike. But do you see that white place up there, where
there's been a landslide? Well, that's one of my marks. We'll get ashore now.' They
landed.
"'Now, Huck, where we're a-standin', you could touch that hole I got out of with a fishing-pole.
See if you can find it.'
Huck searched all the place about and found nothing. Tom proudly marched into a thick
clump of sumac bushes and said,
"'Here you are. Look at it, Huck. It's the snuggest hole in this country. You just keep
mum about it. All along I've been wanted to be a robber, but I knew I'd got to have a
this, and where to run across it was the bother. We've got it now, and we'll keep it quiet.
Only we'll let Joe Harper and Ben Rogers in, because, of course, there's got to be a gang,
or else there wouldn't be any style about it. Tom Sawyer's gang. It sounds splendid,
don't it, Huck?'
"'Well, it just does, Tom. And who'll we rob?'
"'Oh, most anybody. Weigh lay people, that's mostly the way. And kill them?'
"'No, not always. Hive them in the cave till they raise a ransom.'
"'What's a ransom?'
"'Money. You make them raise all they can, often their friends, and after you've kept
them a year, if it ain't raised, then you kill them. That's the general way, only you
don't kill the women. You shut up the women, but you don't kill them. They're always beautiful
and rich and awfully scared. You take their watches and things, but you always take your
hat off and talk plight. They ain't anybody as plight as robbers. You'll see that in any
book. Well, the women get to loving you, and after they've been in the cave a week or two
weeks they stop crying, and after that you couldn't get them to leave. If you drove them
out they'd turn right round and come back. It's so in all the books.'
"'Why, it's really bully, Tom. I believe it's betterin' to be a pirate.'
"'Yes, it's better in some ways, because it's close to home and circuses and all that.'
By this time everything was ready and the boys entered the hole, Tom in the lead. They
toiled their way to the farther end of the tunnel, then made their spliced kite-strings
fast and moved on. A few steps brought them to the spring, and Tom felt a shudder quiver
all through him. He showed Huck the fragment of Candlewick perched on a lump of clay against
the wall, and described how he and Becky had watched the flames struggle and expire. The
boys began to quiet down to whispers now, for the stillness and gloom of the place oppressed
their spirits. They went on, and presently entered, and followed Tom's other corridors
until they reached the jumping-off place. The candles revealed the fact that it was
not really a precipice, but only a steep clay hill twenty or thirty feet high. Tom whispered,
"'Now I'll show you something, Huck.' He held his candle aloft, and said, "'Look as
far round the corner as you can. Do you see that? There, on the big rock over yonder,
down with the candle-smoke. Tom, it's a cross. Now, where's your number two?'
"'Under the cross, hey. Right yonder's where I saw Injun Joe poke up his candle, Huck.'
Huck stared at the mystic sign awhile, and then said with a shaky voice,
"'Tom, let's get out of here.'
"'What! And leave the treasure?'
"'Yes, leave it. Injun Joe's ghost is round about there, certain.'
"'No, it ain't, Huck, no it ain't. It would haunt the place where he died, way out at
the mouth of the cave, five miles from here.'
"'No, Tom, it wouldn't. It would hang around the money. I know the ways of ghosts, and
so do you.'
Tom began to fear that Huck was right. Misgivings gathered in his mind, but presently an idea
occurred to him.
"'Look here, Tuck, what fools we're making of ourselves. Injun Joe's ghost ain't a-going
to come round where there's a cross.' The point was well taken. It had its effect.
"'Tom, I didn't think of that. But that's so. It's luck for us that cross is. I reckon
we'll climb down there and have a hunt for that box.'
Tom went first, cutting rude steps in the clay hill as he descended. Huck followed.
Four avenues opened out of the small cavern which the great rock stood in. The boys examined
three of them with no result. They found a small recess in the one nearest the base of
rock, with a pallet of blankets spread down in it. Also an old suspender, some bacon rind,
and the well-nog bones of two or three fowls. But there was no money box. The lads searched
and researched this place, but in vain. Tom said,
"'He said under the cross. Well, this comes nearest to being under the cross. It can't
be under the rock itself, because that's set solid on the ground.' They searched everywhere
once more, and then sat down discouraged. Huck could suggest nothing. By-and-by Tom
said,
"'Looky here, Huck, there's footprints and some candle-grease on the clay about one side
of this rock, but not on the other sides. Now what's that for?'
"'I bet you the money is under the rock. I'm going to dig in the clay.'
"'That ain't no bad notion, Tom,' said Huck with animation. Tom's real barlow was out
at once, and he had not dug four inches before he struck wood.
"'Hey, Huck, you hear that?'
Huck began to dig and scratch now. Some boards were soon uncovered and removed. They had
concealed a natural chasm which led under the rock. Tom got into this and held his candle
as far under the rock as he could, but said he could not see to the end of the rift. He
proposed to explore. He stooped and passed under. The narrow way descended gradually.
He followed its winding course, first to the right and then to the left. Huck at his heels.
Tom turned a short curve by and by and exclaimed,
"'My goodness, Huck, looky here!'
It was the treasure box, sure enough, occupying a snug little cavern, along with an empty
powder keg, a couple of guns and leather cases, two or three pairs of old moccasins, a leather
belt, and some other rubbish, well soaked with the water-drip.
"'Got it at last,' said Huck, ploughing among the tarnished coins with his hands.
"'My, but we're rich, Tom!'
"'Huck, I always reckoned we'd get it. It's just too good to believe. But we have got
it, sure. Say, let's not fool around here. Let's snake it out. Let me see if we can lift
the box.'
It weighed about fifty pounds. Tom could lift it after an awkward fashion, but could not
carry it conveniently.
"'I thought so,' he said. They carried it like it was heavy, that day at the haunted
house. I noticed that. I reckon I was right to think of fetching the little bags along."
The money was soon in the bags, and the boys took it up to the cross-rock.
"'Now, let's fetch the guns and things,' said Huck.
"'No, Huck. Leave them there. They're just the tricks to have when you go to robbing.
We'll keep them there all the time, and we'll hold our orgies there, too. It's an awful
snug place for orgies.'
"'What's orgies?'
"'I don't know. But robbers always have orgies, and of course we've got to have them, too.'
"'Come along, Huck. We've been here a long time. It's getting late, I reckon. I'm hungry,
too. We'll eat and smoke when we get to the skiff.'
They presently emerged into the clump of Sumac bushes, looked warily about, found the coast
clear, and were soon lunching and smoking in the skiff. As the sun dipped toward the
horizon they pushed out and got under way. Tom skimmed up the shore through the long
twilight chatting cheerily with Huck, and landed shortly after dark.
"'Now, Huck,' said Tom, "'we'll hide the money in the loft of the Witter's woodshed,
and I'll come up in the morning, and we'll count it and divide it, and then we'll hunt
up a place out in the woods for it, where it will be safe. Just you lay quiet here and
watch the stuff till I run up and hook Benny Taylor's little wagon. I won't be gone a minute.'
He disappeared, and presently returned with the wagon, put the two small sacks into it,
threw some old rags on top of them, and started off dragging his cargo behind him. When the
boys reached the Welshman's house they stopped to rest. Just as they were about to move on
the Welshman stepped out and said,
"'Hullo, who's that?'
"'Huck and Tom Sawyer.'
"'Good. Come along with me, boys. You are keeping everybody waiting. Here, hurry up,
trot ahead, I'll haul the wagon for you.'
"'Why, it's not as light as it might be. Got bricks in it? Or old metal?'
"'Old metal,' said Tom.
"'I judge so. The boys in this town will take more trouble and fool away more time
hunting up six bits worth of old iron to sell to the foundry than they would to make twice
the money at regular work. But that's human nature. Hurry along, hurry along.'
The boys wanted to know what the hurry was about.
"'Never mind. You'll see when we get to the widow Douglas's.'
Huck said with some apprehension, for he was long used to being falsely accused.
"'Mr. Jones, we haven't been doing nothing.'
The Welshman laughed.
"'Well, I don't know, Huck, my boy. I don't know about that. Ain't you and the widow
good friends?'
"'Yes. Well, she's been good friends to me, anyways.'
"'All right, then. What do you want to be frayed for?'
This question was not entirely answered in Huck's slow mind before he found himself pushed,
along with Tom, into Mrs. Douglas's drawing-room. Mr. Jones left the wagon near the door and
followed. The place was grandly lighted, and everybody that was of any consequence in the
village was there. The Thatchers were there, the Harpers, the Rogerses, Aunt Polly, Sid,
Mary, the Minister, the Editor, and a great many more, and all dressed in their best.
The widow received the boys as heartily as any one could well receive two such-looking
beings. They were covered with clay and candle-grease. Aunt Polly blushed crimson with humiliation
and frowned and shook her head at Tom. Nobody suffered half as much as the two boys did,
however. Mr. Jones said,
"'Tom wasn't at home yet, so I gave him up. But I stumbled on him and Huck right at my
door, and so I just brought them along in a hurry.'
"'And you did just right,' said the widow.
"'Come with me, boys.' She took them to a bed-chamber, and said,
"'Now, wash and dress yourselves. Here are two new suits of clothes—shirts, socks,
everything complete. They're Huck's.'
"'No, no thanks, Huck. Mr. Jones bought one and I the other. But they'll fit both of you.
Get into them. We'll wait. Come down when you are slicked up enough.' Then she left."
FLOODS OF GOLD
Huck said,
"'Tom, we can slope if we can find a rope. The window ain't high from the ground.'
"'Shucks, what do you want to slope for?'
"'Well, I ain't used to that kind of crowd. I can't stand it. I ain't going down there, Tom.'
"'Oh, bother it ain't anything. I don't mind it a bit. I'll take care of you,' said appeared.
"'Tom,' said he, "'Auntie has been waiting for you all the afternoon.
Mary got your Sunday clothes ready, and everybody's been fretting about you.
Say, ain't this grease and clay on your clothes? Now, Mr. City,
you just tend to your own business. What's all this blow-out about, anyway?'
"'It's one of the widow's parties that she's always having. This time it's for the Welshman
and his sons, on account of that scrape they helped her out of the other night.
And say, I can tell you something, if you want to know.'
"'Well, what? Why, old Mr. Jones is going to try to spring something on the people here
to-night, but I overheard him tell Auntie to-day about it, as a secret,
but I reckon it's not much of a secret now. Everybody knows, the widow too,
for all she tries to let on she don't, Mr. Jones was bound Huck should be here,
couldn't get along with his grand secret without Huck, you know.'
"'Secret about what, Sid?'
"'About Huck tracking the robbers to the widow's. I reckon Mr. Jones was
going to make a grand time over his surprise, but I bet you it will drop
pretty flat.' Sid chuckled in a very contented and satisfied way.
"'Sid, was it you that told?'
"'Oh, never mind who it was. Somebody told, that's enough. Sid, there's only
one person in this town mean enough to do that, and that's you. If you'd
been in Huck's place, you'd have sneaked down the hill and never told
anybody on the robbers. You can't do any but mean things, and you can't
see anybody praise for doing good ones. There, no thanks, as the widow
says, and Tom cuffed Sid's ears and helped him to the door with several
kicks. Now go and tell Auntie if you dare, and tomorrow you'll catch it.'
Some minutes later the widow's guests were at the supper table, and a
dozen children were propped up at little side tables in the same room
after the fashion of that country and that day. At the proper time Mr.
Jones made his little speech, in which he thanked the widow for the
honor she was doing himself and his sons, but said that there was
another person whose modesty and so forth and so on. He sprung his
secret about Huck's share in the adventure in the finest dramatic
manner he was master of, but the surprise at occasion was largely
counterfeit and not as clamorous and effusive as it might have been
under happier circumstances. However, the widow made a pretty fair show
of astonishment and heaped so many compliments and so much gratitude
upon Huck that he almost forgot the nearly intolerable discomfort of
his new clothes in the entirely intolerable discomfort of being set up
as a target for everybody's gaze and everybody's laudations. The widow
said she meant to give Huck a home under her roof and have him
educated, and that when she could spare the money she would start him in
business in a modest way. Tom's chance was come. He said,
"'Huck don't need it. Huck's rich.' Nothing but a heavy strain upon the
good manners of the company kept back the due and proper complementary
laugh at this pleasant joke, but the silence was a little awkward. Tom
broke it. "'Huck's got money. Maybe you don't believe it, but he's got
lots of it. Oh, you needn't smile. I reckon I can show you. You just
wait a minute.' Tom ran out of doors. The company looked at each other
with a perplexed interest and inquiringly at Huck, who was tongue-tied.
"'Sid! What ails Tom?' said Aunt Polly. "'He—well, there ain't ever any
making of that boy out. I never—' Tom entered, struggling with the
weight of his sacks, and Aunt Polly did not finish her sentence. Tom
poured the mass of yellow coins upon the table and said, "'There! What
did I tell you? Half of it's Huck's and half of it's mine!' The
spectacle took the general breath away. All gazed, nobody spoke for a
moment. Then there was a unanimous call for an explanation. Tom said he
could furnish it, and he did. The tale was long, but brimful of interest.
There was scarcely an interruption from any one to break the charm of
its flow. When he had finished, Mr. Jones said, "'I thought I had fixed
up a little surprise for this occasion, but it don't amount to anything
now. This one makes it sing mighty small, I'm willing to allow.' The
money was counted. The sum amounted to a little over $12,000. It was
more than any one present had ever seen at one time before, though
several persons were there who were worth considerably more than that in
property."
RESPECTABLE HUCK JOINS THE GANG.
The reader may rest satisfied that Tom's and Huck's windfall made a
mighty stir in the poor little village of St. Petersburg. So vast a sum,
all in actual cash, seemed next to incredible. It was talked about,
gloated over, glorified, until the reason of many of the citizens
tottered under the strain of the unhealthy excitement. Every haunted
house in St. Petersburg and the neighbouring villages was dissected
plank by plank, and its foundations dug up and ransacked for hidden
treasure. And not by boys, but men, pretty grave, unromantic men, too,
some of them. Wherever Tom and Huck appeared they were courted,
admired, stared at. The boys were not able to remember that their
remarks had possessed weight before, but now their sayings were
treasured and repeated. Everything they did seemed somehow to be
regarded as remarkable. They had evidently lost the power of doing and
saying commonplace things. Moreover, their past history was raked up
and discovered to bear marks of conspicuous originality. The village
published biographical sketches of the boys. The widow Douglas put
Huck's money out at six per cent, and Judge Thatcher did the same with
Tom's at Aunt Polly's request. Each lad had an income now that was
simply prodigious—a dollar for every weekday in the year and half of
the Sundays. It was just what the minister got—no, it was what he was
promised. He generally couldn't collect it. A dollar and a quarter a
week would board, lodge, and school a boy in those old simple days, and
clothe him and wash him, too, for that matter.
Judge Thatcher had conceived a great opinion of Tom. He said that no
commonplace boy would ever have got his daughter out of the cave. When
Becky told her father, in strict confidence, how Tom had taken her
whipping at school, the judge was visibly moved. And when she pleaded
grace for the mighty lie which Tom had told in order to shift that
from her shoulders to his own, the judge said with a fine outburst that
it was a noble, a generous, a magnanimous lie—a lie that was worthy
to hold up its head and march down through history, breast to breast,
with George Washington's lauded truth about the hatchet. Becky thought
her father had never looked so tall and so superb as when he walked the
floor and stamped his foot and said that. She went straight off and told
Tom about it. Judge Thatcher hoped to see Tom a great lawyer or a great
soldier some day. He said he meant to look to it that Tom should be
admitted to the National Military Academy and afterward trained in the
best law school in the country, in order that he might be ready for
either career or both. Huck Finn's wealth and the fact that he was now
under the widow Douglas's protection introduced him into society—no,
dragged him into it, hurled him into it, and his sufferings were almost
more than he could bear. The widow's servants kept him clean and neat,
combed and brushed, and they bedded him nightly in unsympathetic
sheets that had not one little spot or stain which he could press to his
heart and know for a friend. He had to eat with knife and fork, and had
to use napkin, cup, and plate. He had to learn his book. He had to go to
church. He had to talk so properly that speech was becoming sippid in his
mouth. Withersoever he turned, the bars and shackles of civilization
shut him in, and bound him hand and foot. He bravely bore his miseries
three weeks, and then one day turned up missing. For forty-eight hours
the widow hunted for him everywhere in great distress. The public were
profoundly concerned. They searched high and low, they dragged the river
for his body. Early the third morning Tom Sawyer wisely went poking
among some old empty hogsheads down behind the abandoned slaughterhouse,
and in one of them he found the refugee. Huck had slept there. He had
just breakfast upon some stolen odds and ends of food, and was lying off
now in comfort with his pipe. He was unkempt, uncombed, and clad in the
same old ruin of rags that had made him picturesque in the days when he
was free and happy. Tom routed him out, told him the trouble he had been
causing, and urged him to go home. Huck's face lost its tranquil content,
and took a melancholy cast. He said,
Don't talk about it, Tom. I've tried it, and it don't work. It don't
work, Tom. It ain't for me. I ain't used to it. The widow's good to me
and friendly, but I can't stand them ways. She makes me get up just at
the same time every morning. She makes me wash, they comb me all to
thunder. She won't let me sleep in the woodshed. I got to wear them
blamed clothes that just smothers me, Tom. They don't seem to let any
air get through them somehow, and they're so rotten nice that I can't
sit down, nor lay down, nor roll around anywheres. I ain't slid on a
cellar door for—well, it appears to be years. I got to go to church
and sweat and sweat. I hate them ornery sermons. I can't catch a fly in
there. I can't chaw. I got to wear shoes all Sunday. The widow eats by
a bell. She goes to bed by a bell. She gets up by a bell. Everything's
awful regular. A body can't stand it. Well, everybody does that, Huck.
Tom, it don't make no difference. I ain't everybody, and I can't stand
it. It's awful to be tied up so, and grub comes too easy. I don't take
no interest in vittles that way. I got to ask to go a fishing. I got to
ask to go in a swimming. Durned if I ain't got to ask to do everything.
Well, I'd got to talk so nice it wasn't no comfort. I'd got to go up in
the attic and rip out a while every day to get a taste in my mouth, or
I'd have died, Tom. The widow wouldn't let me smoke. She wouldn't let
me yell. She wouldn't let me gape, nor stretch, nor scratch before
folks. Then, with a spasm of special irritation and injury, and dead
fetch it, she prayed all the time. I never see such a woman. I had to
shove, Tom. I just had to. And besides, that school's going to open, and
I'd have got to go to it. Well, I wouldn't stand that, Tom. Looky here,
Tom. Being rich ain't what it's cracked up to be. It's just worry and
worry, and sweat and sweat, and a-wishing you was dead all the time.
Now, these clothes suits me, and this barrel suits me, and I ain't ever
going to shake them any more. Tom, I wouldn't ever got into all this
trouble if it hadn't been for that money. Now, you just take my share of
it along with urine, and give me a ten cent or sometimes—not many
times—because I don't give a darn for a thing without its tolerable
hard-to-get, and you go and beg off for me with a witter.
Oh, Huck, you know I can't do that. It ain't fair. And besides, if
you'll try this thing just a while longer you'll come to like it.
Like it? Yes, the way I'd like a hot stove, if I was to set on it long
enough. No, Tom, I won't be rich, and I won't live in them cussed
mothery houses. I like the woods and the river and hogsheads, and I'll
stick to them, too. Blame it all, just as we've got guns and a cave and
all just fixed to rob. Hear this darn foolishness has got to come up
and spile it all. Tom saw his opportunity.
Looky here, Huck, being rich ain't going to keep me back from turning
robber.
No.
Oh, good licks. Are you in real deadwood earnest, Tom?
Just as dead earnest as I'm a-sittin' here.
But, Huck, we can't let you into the gang if you ain't respectable,
you know.
Huck's joy was quenched.
Can't let me in, Tom? Didn't you let me go for a pirate?
Yes, but that's different. A robber is more high-toned than what a
pirate is, as a general thing. In most countries they are awful high
up in the nobility, dukes and such.
Now, Tom, ain't you always been friendly to me? You wouldn't have
Tom?
Huck, I wouldn't want to, and I don't want to, but what would people
say? Why, they'd say,
Tom Sawyer's gang, pretty low characters in it.
They'd mean you, Huck. You wouldn't like that, and I wouldn't.
Huck was silent for some time, engaged in a mental struggle, and
finally he said,
Well, I'll go back to the Whitter for a month and tackle it, and see
if I can come to stand it, if you'll let me belong to the gang, Tom.
All right, Huck, it's a whiz. Come along, old chap, and I'll ask the
Whitter to let up on you a little, Huck. Will you, Tom, now, will you?
That's good. If she'll let up on some of the roughest things, I'll
smoke private and cuss private and crowd through or bust. When you're
going to start the gang and turn robbers?
Oh, right off. We'll get the boys together and have the initiation
tonight, maybe.
Have the which?
Have the initiation.
What's that?
It's to swear to stand by one another and never tell the gang secrets,
even if you're chopped all to flinders, and kill anybody and all his
family that hurts one of the gang.
That's gay, that's mighty gay, Tom, I tell you.
Well, I bet it is, and all that swearing's got to be done at midnight
in the lonesomest, awfulest place you can find. A haunted house is the
best, and they're all ripped up now.
Well, midnight's good, anyway, Tom.
Yes, so it is, and you've got to swear on a coffin and sign it with
blood. Now, that's something like. Why, it's a million times bullier
than pirating. I'll stick to the witter till I rot, Tom, and if I get
to be regular ripper of a robber and everybody talking about it, I
reckon she'll be proud she snaked me in out of the wet.
Conclusion
So endeth this chronicle. It being strictly a history of a boy,
it must stop here. The story could not go much further without
becoming the history of a man. When one writes a novel about grown
people, he knows exactly where to stop, that is, with a marriage. But
when he writes of juveniles, he must stop where he best can. Most of
the characters that perform in this book still live, and are prosperous
and happy. Someday, it may seem worthwhile to take up the story of
younger ones again and see what sort of men and women they turned out
to be. Therefore, it will be wisest not to reveal any of that part of
their lives at present.
The End
This is the end of The Adventures of Tom Sawyer by Mark Twain.